===== Page 2045 =====
# APPENDIX A—EMPLOYEE QUALIFICATIONS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

## General Comments

When adopted (see Section 101.2.1), this appendix provides jurisdictions with training, experience and certification requirements for those employees of the Code Compliance Department responsible for enforcing the provisions of the building code, including the codes referenced in Section 101.4. The authorization to create these positions is found in Section 103 of the code. Note that jurisdictions may also be mandated by applicable state laws to employ only persons licensed by the state to perform certain duties and may or may not be able to impose additional requirements.

## Purpose

The purpose of this appendix is to provide optional criteria for qualifications for employees who enforce the code.

## SECTION A101 BUILDING OFFICIAL QUALIFICATIONS

A101.1 Building official. The building official shall have at least 10 years' experience or equivalent as an architect, engineer, inspector, contractor or superintendent of construction, or any combination of these, 5 years of which shall have been supervisory experience. The building official should be certified as a building official through a recognized certification program. The building official shall be appointed or hired by the applicable governing authority.

As the executive official in charge of administering the code enforcement program of the jurisdiction, the building official is required to possess significant experience in the construction industry, including at least 5 years as a supervisor. This position may have a different title, as described in the commentary to Section 103.1.

A101.2 Chief inspector. The building official can designate supervisors to administer the provisions of this code and SBC 501, SBC 701 and SBC 1201. Each supervisor shall have at least 10 years' experience or equivalent as an architect, engineer, inspector, contractor or superintendent of construction, or any combination of these, 5 years of which shall have been in a supervisory capacity. They shall be certified through a recognized certification program for the appropriate trade.

People who supervise inspectors and plans examiners who review construction for conformance to the building and referenced codes are expected to have considerable experience in their area of expertise, since they are responsible for overseeing the day-today operation of their divisions within the department. Large departments may have a separate division for each of the codes, while those of lesser size may group two or more together. Because of the responsibility placed on these persons, it is required that they have demonstrated knowledge of the codes they administer by being certified in the appropriate category. ICC provides certification programs that cover the range of categories involved.

A101.3 Inspector and plans examiner. The building official shall appoint or hire such number of officers, inspectors, assistants and other employees as shall be authorized by the jurisdiction. A person shall not be appointed or hired as inspector of construction or plans examiner who has not had at least 5 years' experience as a contractor, engineer, architect, or as a superintendent, foreman or competent mechanic in charge of construction. The inspector or plans examiner shall be certified through a recognized certification program for the appropriate trade.

People who supervise inspectors and plans examiners who review construction for conformance to the building and referenced codes are expected to have considerable experience in their area of expertise, since they are responsible for overseeing the day-today operation of their divisions within the department. Large departments may have a separate division for each of the codes, while those of lesser size may group two or more together. Because of the responsibility placed on these persons, it is required that they have demonstrated knowledge of the codes they administer by being certified in the appropriate category. ICC provides certification programs that cover the range of categories involved.

A101.4 Termination of employment. Employees in the position of building official, chief inspector or inspector shall not be removed from office except for cause after full opportunity has been given to be heard on specific charges before such applicable governing authority.

===== Page 2046 =====
This section establishes that, once employed, the building official and other technical employees of the department cannot be removed, except for cause, subject to a due process review of the specific charges.

## SECTION A102 REFERENCED

## STANDARDS

SBC 201 Saudi Building Code-General A101.2

SBC 501 Saudi Mechanical Code A101.2

SBC 701 Saudi Plumbing Code A101.2

SBC 1201 Saudi Fuel and Gas Code A101.2

===== Page 2047 =====
This page left intentionally blank

===== Page 2048 =====
# APPENDIX B—BOARD OF APPEALS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

## General Comments

When adopted (see Section 101.2.1), this appendix provides jurisdictions with detailed appeals board member qualifications and administrative procedures to supplement the basic requirements found in Section 113.

## Purpose

The purpose of this appendix is to provide optional criteria for administrative procedures of the board of appeals and board member qualifications.

## SECTION B101 GENERAL

B101.1 Application. The application for appeal shall be filed on a form obtained from the building official within 20 days after the notice was served.

A party aggrieved by a decision of the building official and desiring to appeal that decision must file a written request for a hearing in a timely manner, in this case 20 days from the date of the decision. The building official's decision also needs to be in writing, as specified in Sections 105.3.1 for a permit application, 110.6 for an inspection and 114.2 for a violation, or in a letter written regarding a request for an approval, depending on the action being appealed. The request must be on the jurisdiction's standard appeals form, which requires the appellant to provide the information needed by the board members to make a decision. This is often supplemented by whatever additional information the appellant wants to provide to support his or her case.

B101.2 Membership of board. The board of appeals shall consist of persons appointed by the chief appointing authority as follows:

1 One for 5 years; one for 4 years; one for 3 years; one for 2 years; and one for 1 year.

2 Thereafter, each new member shall serve for 5 years or until a successor has been appointed.

The building official shall be an ex officio member of said board but shall have no vote on any matter before the board.

The board of appeals is to consist of five members appointed by the "chief appointing authority," typically the mayor or city manager. One member must be appointed for 5 years, one for 4, one for 3, one for 2 and one for 1 year. This method of appointment allows for a smooth transition of board of appeals members, providing continuity of action over the years. The building official also sits as a member of the board, but cannot vote on matters regarding his or her own decisions.

B101.2.1 Alternate members. The chief appointing authority shall appoint two alternate members who shall be called by the board chairperson to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for board membership and shall be appointed for 5 years, or until a successor has been appointed.

This section authorizes the chief appointing authority to appoint two alternate members who must be available if the principal members of the board are absent or disqualified. Alternate members must possess the same qualifications as the principal members and are appointed for terms of 5 years, or until such time that a successor is appointed.

B101.2.2 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of five individuals, one from each of the following professions or disciplines:

1 Registered design professional with architectural experience or a builder or superintendent of building construction with at least 10 years' experience, 5 of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.

2 Registered design professional with structural engineering experience.

3 Registered design professional with mechanical and plumbing engineering experience or a mechanical contractor with at least 10 years' experience, 5 of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.

4 Registered design professional with electrical engineering experience or an electrical contractor with at least 10 years' experience, 5 of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.

5 Registered design professional with fire protection engineering experience or a fire protection contractor with at least 10 years' experience, 5 of which shall have been in responsible charge of work.

The board of appeals consists of five persons with the qualifications and experience indicated in this section. One must be a registered design professional (see Item 2) with structural

===== Page 2049 =====
experience. The others must be registered design professionals, construction superintendents or contractors with experience in the various areas of building construction. This is necessary because the board will be hearing appeals regarding the codes referenced in Section 101.4 as well as the building code. These requirements are important in that technical people rule on technical matters. The board of appeals is not the place for policy or political deliberations. It is intended that these matters be decided purely on their technical merits, with due regard for state-of-the-art construction technology.

B101.2.3 Rules and procedures. The board is authorized to establish policies and procedures necessary to carry out its duties.

The board can set forth the detailed procedures by which it operates, supplementing those required by Section B101.3.2.

B101.2.4 Chairperson. The board shall annually select one of its members to serve as chairperson.

It is customary to determine a chairperson annually, so that a regular opportunity is available to evaluate and either reappoint the current chairperson or appoint a new one.

B101.2.5 Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest.

All members must disqualify themselves regarding any appeal in which they have a personal, professional or financial interest.

B101.2.6 Secretary. The chief administrative officer shall designate a qualified clerk to serve as secretary to the board. The secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the chief administrative officer.

The chief administrative officer is to designate a qualified clerk, typically an employee in the department, to serve as secretary to the board. The secretary is required to keep detailed records of the proceedings. These may be needed for any future review of the board's decision.

B101.2.7 Compensation of members. Compensation of members shall be determined by law.

Members of the board of appeals are not required to be compensated unless required by the law.

B101.3 Notice of meeting. The board shall meet upon notice from the chairperson, within 10 days of the filing of an appeal or at stated periodic meetings.
In order that an appellant's request be heard in a timely manner, the board must meet within 10 days of the filing of an appeal. In large jurisdictions, where there are likely to be more appeals, the board will often set a regular schedule of meeting dates, such as monthly, and the 10-day rule would not apply.

B101.3.1 Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the building official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.

All hearings before the board must be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the building official and any person whose interests are affected must be heard.

B101.3.2 Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received.

The board is required to establish and make available to the public written procedures detailing how hearings are to be conducted. Additionally, this section provides that although strict rules of evidence are not applicable, the information presented must be deemed relevant so the hearings are not unnecessarily long.

B101.3.3 Postponed hearing. When five members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement of the hearing.

When fewer than five members of the board are present, either the appellant or the appellant's representative may request that the hearing be postponed. Note that this is not a requirement, and that the appellant can elect to have the case heard before the smaller board.

B101.4 Board decision. The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the building official by a concurring vote of two-thirds of its members.

A concurring vote of two-thirds of the board is needed to modify or reverse the decision of the building official. This means that at least four members must vote to modify or reverse the building official, even if less than the full board is present in accordance with Section B101.3.3.

B101.4.1 Resolution. The decision of the board shall be by resolution. Certified copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the building official.

The building official is to be bound by the action of the board of appeals, unless it is the opinion

===== Page 2050 =====
of the building official that the board of appeals has acted improperly. In such cases, relief through the court having jurisdiction may be sought by the jurisdiction's counsel.

B101.4.2 Administration. The building official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the board.

To avoid any undue hindrance in the progress of construction, the building official is required to act without delay based on the board's decision. This action may be to enforce the decision or to seek judicial relief if the board's action can be demonstrated to be inappropriate.

===== Page 2051 =====
This page left intentionally blank

===== Page 2052 =====
# APPENDIX C—GROUP U-AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

## General Comments

The provisions of this appendix are supplemental to the remainder of the code's requirements for agricultural buildings and are only applicable when specifically adopted, as stated in Section 101.2.1. This appendix contains provisions that may alter requirements found elsewhere in the code; however, the general requirements of the code still apply unless modified within this appendix. For example, the height and area limitations established in Chapter 5 apply to all Group U buildings and structures unless this appendix is specifically adopted by the jurisdiction. In such a case, the allowable height and area limitations in Table C102.1 would supersede those in Table 504.3.

As with all of the appendices to the code, the provisions of this appendix are not applicable unless the appendix is explicitly included in an adopting ordinance by the jurisdiction. Section 101.2.1 establishes the relationship of all appendices (see the commentary to that section for further discussion).

Section 312.1 of the code already contains a use and occupancy classification for buildings and structures considered as utility or miscellaneous in nature. Included in the Group U classification are agricultural buildings, barns, grain silos, greenhouses, livestock shelters, sheds and stables. Complete and detailed requirements are contained in the code for Group U buildings and structures. In most cases these provisions are more restrictive than a Group S-1 occupancy containing moderate-hazard contents that are likely to burn with moderate rapidity. This appendix provides alternative provisions that can be adopted by a jurisdiction to realistically match safeguards with the actual hazards associated with buildings and structures that are minimally occupied by persons and pose a limited fire risk.

## Purpose

This appendix contains the requirements for protecting agricultural buildings. The provisions in this appendix reflect those occupancies and uses that deserve special consideration based on their limited occupant load. The code's foundation is the equivalent risk theory. Type of construction, fire-resistance ratings and means of egress requirements are balanced with the risks associated with agricultural buildings. This appendix contains general requirements, allowable heights and areas, mixed use provisions and exit requirements. The purpose of these provisions is to modify or supersede the basic code requirements for agricultural buildings. This approach allows the jurisdiction an alternative method that is more liberal and to address just the requirements for agricultural buildings that are included in this appendix.

## SECTION C101 GENERAL

C101.1 Scope. The provisions of this appendix shall apply exclusively to agricultural buildings. Such buildings shall be classified as Group U and shall include the following uses:

1 Livestock shelters or buildings, including shade structures and milking barns.

2 Poultry buildings or shelters.

3 Barns.

4 Storage of equipment and machinery used exclusively in agriculture.

5 Horticultural structures, including detached production greenhouses and crop protection shelters.

6 Sheds.

7 Grain silos.

8 Stables.

This section contains the scope and applicability requirements for agricultural buildings. A specific list is provided to identify which agricultural buildings are intended to be controlled by the alternative requirements of the appendix. This list expands and clarifies agricultural buildings as stated in Section 312.1. This section of the code contains an explicit list of those types of agricultural buildings that are eligible for the alternative requirements of this appendix. Section 312.1 contains a similar list of utility and miscellaneous uses classified as Group U. Livestock shelters, barns, greenhouses, sheds, grain silos and stables are contained in both lists. Additionally, the term “livestock shelters” has been expanded to include weather-protection structures and those used as milking barns. All of these buildings and structures are united in that they are used exclusively for agricultural purposes. As such, the occupant load for a Group U building is minimal. Although some of these structures may contain a considerable fuel load associated with their contents and uses, they

===== Page 2053 =====
would pose little fire hazard to persons or other occupiable buildings. The intent of the code is to match minimal requirements with these buildings based on the minimal fire and life hazards they pose.

## SECTION C102 ALLOWABLE HEIGHT AND AREA

C102.1 General. Buildings classified as Group U Agricultural shall not exceed the area or height limits specified in Table C102.1.

This section provides general building height and area limitations for Group U occupancies, as does Chapter 5 of the code. The height limitations in Section 504, in terms of number of stories, and the area limitations in Table 506.2 for Group U buildings are in all cases the same or significantly less than those established for a Group S-1 structure. Those types of buildings are characterized by significant fuel loads that usually mandate the presence of an on-site automatic fire sprinkler system to reduce the hazards to acceptable levels. A Group U building typically contains a lesser fire hazard and therefore, the allowable heights and areas should be greater than what is permitted for Group S-1 occupancies.

Revised entries for Table 506.2 are provided in this section for Group U buildings. Additionally, there are two modifications provided that supplement the requirements of Sections 507.1 and 507.4 for unlimited area buildings. The provisions for governing the heights and areas of agricultural buildings are established in this section and are based on the Group U occupancy classification and the building's type of construction. Table C102.1 is referenced here as the primary determinant for the minimum type of construction required for Group U buildings.

## See TABLE C102.1.

This table is configured similar to Table 506.2. The nine types of construction are listed across the top of the table. Included are separate lines for the allowable area, allowable height in terms of the number of stories and allowable height in terms of meters. The values listed for height in terms of meters are the same values listed in Table 504.3. Only the allowable areas and heights in terms of number of stories have been increased above that allowed by Table 504.4. Although not specifically stated here, the rest of the provisions of Chapter 5 are still applicable in terms of the affect that automatic sprinkler systems have on potential increases in height and area. (See Sections 504 and 506).

C102.2 One-story unlimited area. The area of a one-story Group U agricultural building shall not be limited if the building is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 18 m in width.

Just as additional allowances are made for unlimited area buildings in Section 507, there are similar provisions for agricultural buildings. A single-story building without a basement level containing agricultural uses represents a low fire hazard due to the limited number of occupants that may be present. If such a building is further isolated with sufficient clear open space around it, the building area is not limited. No other structures may be located within the 18 m of clear open space required around the building. The open space must be located on the same lot as the agricultural building to allow access for firefighting operations. The type of construction is not restricted with this option.

C102.3 Two-story unlimited area. The area of a two-story Group U agricultural building shall not be limited if the building is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 18 m in width and is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

This provision of the appendix, in effect, expands the allowance of Section 507.5. A two-story unlimited area agricultural building is permitted with the same open space requirement of Section C102.2 when it is equipped throughout with an automatic NFPA 13 fire sprinkler system. An agricultural building represents a lesser hazard than a Group B, F, M or S building. Therefore, a two-story, fully suppressed agricultural building can also be of unlimited area as long as it is isolated. Once again, the type of construction is not restricted in these buildings.

## SECTION C103 MIXED OCCUPANCIES

C103.1 Mixed occupancies. Mixed occupancies shall be protected in accordance with Section 508.

The appendix includes a reference for any mixed occupancies that may exist within the agricultural building, for example, a large milking barn with integral offices and lab areas used for the transaction of farm business and testing of milk products. Since these areas are occupiable spaces, they are not classified as part of the Group U portions. Most likely these areas are classified as Group B. As such, the building must be protected in accordance with Chapter 3. Another example would be a barn with sleeping accommodations for migrant farm workers. The sleeping rooms would be considered as guestrooms and would need to be classified as Group R. Any of the options listed in Section 508 are available to the building designer to address the mixed uses and occupancies that may be present within an

===== Page 2054 =====
agricultural building. This would include accessory use areas in Section 508.2, Nonseparated uses in Section 508.3.1 or separated uses in Section 508.4.

## SECTION C104 EXITS

C104.1 Exit facilities. Exits shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 10 and 11.

Exceptions:

1. The maximum travel distance from any point in the building to an approved exit shall not exceed 90 m.

2. One exit is required for each 1400 m² of area or fraction thereof.

The last section of the appendix provides a reminder to the permit applicant that the means of egress requirements of the code are still applicable to agricultural buildings. Although these buildings have a minimal number of occupants, provisions must still be made for their egress. This section includes two modifications to the Chapter 10 requirements that acknowledge the low occupant load and the limited hazards to which occupants are exposed.

The means of egress for agricultural buildings must comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 10. For example, Table 1004.5 specifies an occupant load for agricultural buildings based on a rate of one person for every 30 m² of gross floor area. Typically, Group U buildings are exempt from the requirements of Chapter 11 for accessibility to buildings by physically disabled persons. Section 1103.2.4 only mandates that access is required to paved work areas and those areas within a building or structure that are open to the general public.

The two exceptions modify or reinforce certain requirements of Chapter 10. Table 1017.2 limits the exit access travel distance for Group U buildings to 90 m. Exception 1 restates this 90 m limit.

Exception 2 refines Table 1021.1 in determining the number of exits required for agricultural buildings. An exit is required for every 1400 m² of floor area. This works out to the same 50 occupants specified in Table 1006.3.4(2); however, the 23 m travel distance limitation is not applicable.

===== Page 2055 =====
## TABLES OF APPENDIX C

TABLE C102.1

BASIC ALLOWABLE AREA FOR A GROUP U, ONE STORY IN HEIGHT AND MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF SUCH OCCUPANCY

<table>

===== Page 2056 =====
This page left intentionally blank

===== Page 2057 =====
# APPENDIX D—FIRE DISTRICTS

## General Comments

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance, as stated in Section 101.2.1.

## Purpose

Fire districts, in one form or another, have been in the model codes for years. Over time, they have been revised, and in some cases deleted, as the codes have evolved to address the conflagration hazards that the fire district concept was intended to abate. However, there are jurisdictions that continue to utilize the provisions for fire districts. It is for this reason, in order to transition from the previously adopted model code to SBC 201, that the provisions have been incorporated into the appendix.

## SECTION D101 GENERAL

D101.1 Scope. The fire district shall include such territory or portion as outlined in an ordinance or law entitled “An Ordinance (Resolution) Creating and Establishing a Fire District.” Wherever, in such ordinance creating and establishing a fire district, reference is made to the fire district, it shall be construed to mean the fire district designated and referred to in this appendix.

The establishment of fire districts is among the oldest recognized means of controlling the threat of urban conflagrations. (The term “conflagration” is used to describe a fire that involves three or more buildings and spreads across a natural or constructed barrier, such as a stream, street or other open space.) In fact, the use of fire district ordinances by the authorities could be considered an early form of land use control similar to zoning as it is now practiced. Establishment of fire districts became popular at the beginning of the 20th century as a means of preventing the destruction of entire cities by fire. Massive urban conflagrations struck Chicago (1871), Baltimore (1872 and 1904) and San Francisco (1906), destroying all or most of the urbanized areas as they then existed just as these cities were experiencing perhaps their greatest development. Fire districts usually include areas, designated by the government, which are considered susceptible to mass fires involving multiple buildings or groups of buildings. While it may be true that fire district ordinances and building code adoption have significantly reduced the incidence of conflagrations in densely built or populated urbanized areas, continuing development of suburban and rural communities in areas where nearby wildfires are preserved or protected has spurred the increased incidence and severity of fires in urban/wildland interface and inter-mix areas, which often lie outside designated fire districts. This appendix is currently not designed to address this hazard. This appendix establishes regulatory guidelines for controlling construction, use and occupancy of buildings and conduct of dangerous operations or processes in urbanized areas that may be especially prone to the danger of fires spreading from one building to another. This appendix may be particularly useful in managing fire danger in areas built prior to the adoption and enforcement of a building code but, as stated, may not be suitable for managing the threat of urban/wildland interface and intermix area fire hazards.

D101.1.1 Mapping. The fire district complying with the provisions of Section D101.1 shall be shown on a map that shall be available to the public.

The requirement to prepare a map facilitates communication to the public of the additional controls found in these guidelines. In effect, establishing a fire district is a form of land use regulation, and many communities include fire district controls in their zoning ordinance or establish fire districts through overlay zoning. Zoning maps are frequently prepared and used to communicate land use controls to the public and to illustrate the relationships between land uses, infrastructure and other features of the community.

D101.2 Establishment of area. For the purpose of this code, the fire district shall include that territory or area as described in Sections D101.2.1 through D101.2.3.

The following sections describe the conditions typical of fire districts established by ordinances that reference this appendix. Note that these sections are not customarily intended to include an entire jurisdiction. In fact, this is contrary to the fundamental purpose of a fire district—protection from catastrophic fires that could destroy an entire town. By dividing all jurisdictions into at least two separate fire districts, a city presumably reduces its risk to destruction of just a portion

===== Page 2058 =====
of the city or town. In newer communities developed largely after the adoption of local land use regulations and building codes, fire districts provide little added protection against conflagrations.

If a community is so compact and densely developed that designation of separate areas is not possible or practical, an entire jurisdiction could be designated a fire district as a means of controlling hazardous occupancies and regulating combustible construction.

When adopted for use in areas developed prior to the adoption of a building code, fire districts may serve as an effective means of abating the hazard posed when no single building constitutes a public nuisance, but taken in aggregate, the hazard of groups of similarly non-code-conforming buildings is considered unreasonable. By preventing new construction and new occupancies from contributing to the nonconformity of existing hazards and isolating these nonconforming districts from new development, a city may gain a measure of security from a mass fire.

D101.2.1 Adjoining blocks. Two or more adjoining blocks, exclusive of intervening streets, where at least 50 percent of the ground area is built upon and more than 50 percent of the built-on area is devoted to hotels and motels of Group R-1; Group B occupancies; theaters, restaurants of Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies; garages, express and freight depots, warehouses and storage buildings used for the storage of finished products (not located with and forming a part of a manufactured or industrial plant); or Group S occupancy. Where the average height of a building is two and one-half stories or more, a block should be considered if the ground area built upon is at least 40 percent.

The fire district should include areas densely developed with light and moderate fire hazard occupancies that have either significant fuel loads or significant transient occupant loads (see Commentary Figure D101.2.1). Theaters; restaurants; hotels and motels; certain types of Group B occupancies and warehouses not associated with industrial operations have been the sites of some of the nation's largest conflagrations. Intentionally set fires and delayed detection or notification of fire-fighting forces have contributed significantly to these losses. Occupancies and occupants typical of those listed in this section may be particularly prone to both of these factors.

Although Group F and M occupancies and Group S warehouses containing raw or waste materials are not listed, they are typically found in these areas as well. One and two-family dwellings; multiple-family housing; schools or day care centers and institutional occupancies are not included in the description because they are typically found in less densely developed areas.

Officials should recognize that redevelopment of industrial and warehouse buildings in existing fire districts for new residential and mercantile uses is increasingly common (see Section D103.2). These activities typically do not pose the same degree of mass fire danger in such buildings, despite the greater frequency of fires in residential occupancies. This may be due to reduced fuel loading and increased occupant activity, which aids in early detection and notification of a fire.

D101.2.2 Buffer zone. Where four contiguous blocks or more comprise a fire district, there shall be a buffer zone of 60 m around the perimeter of such district. Streets, rights-of-way and other open spaces not subject to building construction can be included in the 60 m buffer zone.

The buffer areas described by this section serve as fire or (preferably) fuel breaks by prohibiting the construction of buildings or structures that could become involved, allowing the fire to spread (see Commentary Figure D101.2.2). The green space or buffer zones may include the width of streets, streams or other dedicated rights-of-way that ensure segregation between adjacent fire district zones.

D101.2.3 Developed blocks. Where blocks adjacent to the fire district have developed to the extent that at least 25 percent of the ground area is built upon and 40 percent or more of the built-on area is devoted to the occupancies specified in Section D101.2.1, they can be considered for inclusion in the fire district, and can form all or a portion of the 60 m buffer zone required in Section D101.2.2.

Adjacent blocks may be added to the fire district as development of buffer spaces progresses (see Commentary Figure D101.2.3). However, care should be taken to ensure that the densities of buffer spaces do not increase to such an extent as to provide an avenue of fire spread between adjacent fire districts. If building densities remain between 25 and 50 percent of the land area, danger of fire spread between buildings in separate fire districts remains relatively low, as long as building separations required by Section D102.2 for the construction type are provided and maintained and combustible building features, such as roofing, sheathing, trim, canopies and signs, are similarly controlled.

===== Page 2059 =====
## SECTION D102 BUILDING RESTRICTIONS

D102.1 Types of construction permitted. Within the fire district every building hereafter erected shall be either Type I, II, III or IV, except as permitted in Section D104.

The construction of Type V buildings is prohibited within a fire district. All other construction types are permitted, including unprotected Type IIB and IIIB structures with the further restrictions of Section D102.2 below.

## D102.2 Other specific requirements.

D102.2.1 Exterior walls. Exterior walls of buildings located in the fire district shall comply with the requirements in Table 601 except as required in Section D102.2.6.

Fire-resistant separations between buildings, either by distance or barriers, as described by Table 601, provide protection against fire spread by radiant and convective heat transfer and, to a limited extent, from small flying brands.

D102.2.2 Group H prohibited. Group H occupancies shall be prohibited from location within the fire district.

Group H-1, H-2, H-3 and H-5 hazardous occupancies are prohibited within the fire district because of the fire hazard posed by these occupancies themselves. Group H-4 occupancies are prohibited due to the inherent danger of release and contamination posed by fire should occupancies containing highly toxic, toxic, radioactive or other health-hazard materials be exposed.

D102.2.3 Construction type. Every building shall be constructed as required based on the type of construction indicated in Chapter 6.

This section reinforces the need for new buildings to be constructed as required based on height and area and type of construction considerations in the body of the code.

D102.2.4 Roof covering. Roof covering in the fire district shall conform to the requirements of Class A or B roof coverings as defined in Section 1505.

Class C and wood-shake shingle roofs are prohibited within the fire district due to the danger of fire spread and involvement through production of or exposure to burning brands.

D102.2.5 Structural fire rating. Walls, floors, roofs and their supporting structural members shall be a minimum of 1 hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

Exceptions:

1. Buildings of Type IV-HT construction.
2. Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

3. Automobile parking structures.

4. Buildings surrounded on all sides by a permanently open space of not less than 9 m.

5. Partitions complying with Section 603.1, Item 11.

Unprotected Type IIB and IIIB construction is permitted within the fire district only for fully sprinkled buildings, automobile parking garages and buildings with 9 m of open space on all sides. All other buildings, except those of Type IV construction, must be of fire-resistance-rated construction.

D102.2.6 Exterior walls. Exterior load-bearing walls of Type II buildings shall have a fire-resistance rating of 2 hours or more where such walls are located within 9 m of a common property line or an assumed property line. Exterior nonload-bearing walls of Type II buildings located within 9 m of a common property line, or an assumed property line shall have fire-resistance ratings as required by Table 601, but not less than 1 hour. Exterior walls located more than 9 m from a common property line, or an assumed property line shall comply with Table 601.

Exception: In the case of one-story buildings that are 185 m² or less in area, exterior walls located more than 4.5 m from a common property line or an assumed property line need only comply with Table 601.

Although Type II buildings may be capable of resisting ignition because their components are generally noncombustible, their structural integrity could be threatened or contents ignited by radiant heat exposure from a fire in an adjacent building. Moreover, since Section 603.1, Item 1, permits the use of fire retardant-treated wood for nonbearing partitions and roof systems of Type II buildings, these structures should not be assumed to be of noncombustible construction.

Small accessory buildings [less than 185 m²] are exempt from the exterior wall fire resistance requirements of this section, provided they comply with Table 601 and are located at least 4.5 m from an adjacent or assumed property line. Bear in mind that, except as provided in Section D105, such structures may not be of Type V construction. Such buildings present little danger of contributing to a mass fire, provided they comply with the requirements of the code.

===== Page 2060 =====
D102.2.7 Architectural trim. Architectural trim on buildings located in the fire district shall be constructed of approved noncombustible materials or fire-retardant-treated wood.

The ignition of architectural trim on the exterior of buildings from radiant heat transfer may pilot the ignition of other building components or contents of the building, providing an avenue for further fire spread. Many types of architectural trim may also catch flying brands from a fire, sparking the ignition of the exposed building.

D102.2.8 Permanent canopies. Permanent canopies are permitted to extend over adjacent open spaces provided all of the following are met:

1 The canopy and its supports shall be of noncombustible material, fire-retardant-treated wood, heavy timber complying with Section 2304.11 or of 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

Exception: Any textile covering for the canopy shall be flame resistant as determined by tests conducted in accordance with NFPA 701 after both accelerated water leaching and accelerated weathering.

2 Any canopy covering, other than textiles, shall have a flame spread index not greater than 25 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 in the form intended for use.

3 The canopy shall have at least one long side open.

4 The maximum horizontal width of the canopy shall not exceed 4.5 m.

5 The fire resistance of exterior walls shall not be reduced.

Although combustible exterior canopies may become involved in fire from radiant heat transfer, their relatively low mass and method of support and attachment to the building should minimize the risk that they will pilot the ignition of exterior walls or building contents. The requirements of this section restrict certain features of exterior canopies to ensure that their construction contributes little to fire growth or spread in the fire district.

D102.2.9 Roof structures. Structures, except aerial supports 3.5 m high or less, flagpoles, water tanks and cooling towers, placed above the roof of any building within the fire district shall be of noncombustible material and shall be supported by construction of noncombustible material.

Vertical structures with little combustible mass, or which will be cooled by their contents, are permitted, provided their failure in a fire does not pose a significant secondary hazard. Of course, roof-top water tanks supplying fire protection systems should not be of combustible construction because their failure may undermine the effectiveness of required fire protection systems.

D102.2.10 Plastic signs. The use of plastics complying with Section 2611 for signs is permitted provided the structure of the sign in which the plastic is mounted or installed is noncombustible.

Free-standing and projecting signs are unlikely to contribute to fire spread between buildings, provided their structural supports are noncombustible and structural collapse of the sign supports will not directly expose a building or its contents. Although roof-top, marquee and wall-mounted signs may present a more direct hazard to buildings, Sections 2611.2 and 2611.3 limit the area of any plastic components and require all plastic materials to meet specified combustibility criteria (see Section 2606.4).

D102.2.11 Plastic veneer. Exterior plastic veneer is not permitted in the fire district.

All plastic veneers, including vinyl siding, are prohibited in the fire district. Most plastics deform under high radiant heat conditions, some melt and drip and all will burn. Plastics represent a wide range of fire hazard conditions, generally all of which are unfavorable.

This prohibition is consistent with restrictions on other combustible exterior elements, such as roof and architectural trim. Although this appendix does not explicitly prohibit other combustible exterior veneers, Section D105.1, Item 11, excludes wood veneer from these provisions, and the use of such combustible cladding materials remains severely restricted.

## SECTION D103 CHANGES TO BUILDINGS

D103.1 Existing buildings within the fire district. An existing building shall not hereafter be increased in height or area unless it is of a type of construction permitted for new buildings within the fire district or is altered to comply with the requirements for such type of construction. Nor shall any existing building be hereafter extended on any side, nor square meter or floors added within the existing building unless such modifications are of a type of construction permitted for new buildings within the fire district.

Bearing in mind that the principal purpose of Section D103 is to control the fire hazard posed by existing nonconforming construction by isolating areas where such buildings are located, it would be imprudent to allow any increase in the hazard within the fire district once it is established. Therefore, any new

===== Page 2061 =====
construction must comply with the requirements of the code, including limits on construction, area and height and fire protection (see Section D102.2.3).

D103.2 Other alterations. Nothing in Section D103.1 shall prohibit other alterations within the fire district provided there is no change of occupancy that is otherwise prohibited, and the fire hazard is not increased by such alteration.

All construction and any alteration of existing buildings must comply with the provisions of the code (see Section 101.2). Assuming all new work complies with the relevant requirements of the code and all applicable referenced standards, the hazard of any building in the fire district should not be increased.

Change of occupancy from one group to another is allowed within the fire district, provided that the new occupancy is permitted by the code for the type of construction, fire protection, means of egress and other requirements and is not a hazardous (Group H) occupancy (see Section D102.2.2).

D103.3 Moving buildings. Buildings shall not hereafter be moved into the fire district or to another lot in the fire district unless the building is of a type of construction permitted in the fire district.

* Relocated buildings, like new construction, must be of a type of construction permitted within the fire district. The type of construction will be determined by the area, height and occupancy of the building after its relocation. However, certain structural components and systems may require higher fire-resistance ratings than specified in Table 601 in accordance with Section D102.2.5.

## SECTION D104 BUILDINGS LOCATED
PARTIALLY IN THE FIRE DISTRICT

D104.1 General. Any building located partially in the fire district shall be of a type of construction required for the fire district, unless the major portion of such building lies outside of the fire district and no part is more than 3 m inside the boundaries of the fire district.

* Buildings that lie principally outside the fire district and project no more than 3 m within a fire district boundary are exempt from the fire district requirements and should be considered part of the buffer zone described in Sections D101.2.2 and D101.2.3.

In Commentary Figure D104, Example (A), the building does not need to meet the provisions of Appendix D, since the majority of the building is outside and no more than 3 m of the building lies within the boundaries of the fire district.

In Commentary Figure D104, Example (B), the building shall comply with the provisions of Appendix D, since more than 3 m of the building is within the boundaries of the fire district.

## SECTION D105 EXCEPTIONS TO RESTRICTIONS IN FIRE DISTRICT

D105.1 General. The preceding provisions of this appendix shall not apply in the following instances:

1 Temporary buildings used in connection with duly authorized construction.

2 A private garage used exclusively as such, not more than one story in height, nor more than 60 m \( ^{2} \)  in area, located on the same lot with a dwelling.

3 Fences not over 2.5 m high.

4 Coal tipples, material bins and trestles of Type IV construction.

5 Water tanks and cooling towers conforming to Sections 1510.3 and 1510.4.

6 Greenhouses less than 4.5 m high.

7 Porches on dwellings not over one story in height, and not over 3 m wide from the face of the building, provided such porch does not come within 1.5 m of any property line.

8 Sheds open on a long side not over 4.5 m high and 45 m \( ^{2} \)  in area.

9 One and two-family dwellings where of a type of construction not permitted in the fire district can be extended 25 percent of the floor area existing at the time of inclusion in the fire district by any type of construction permitted by this code.

10 Wood decks less than 55 m \( ^{2} \)  where constructed of 50 mm nominal wood, pressure treated for exterior use.

11 Wood veneers on exterior walls conforming to Section 1404.5.

12 Exterior plastic veneer complying with Section 2605.2 where installed on exterior walls required to have a fire-resistance rating not less than 1 hour, provided the exterior plastic veneer does not exhibit sustained flaming as defined in NFPA 268.

With the exception of Items 11 and 12, excluded structures are generally accessory to other buildings and pose little hazard of contributing to fire spreading from one building to another or between buildings in adjacent fire districts. Excluding these structures from the provisions of this appendix does not exempt any new structures of the types or uses listed from complying with the requirements of the code.

Water tanks for fire protection located within the fire district may not be governed by the requirements of this appendix.

===== Page 2062 =====
Wood veneer applied to the exterior of structures must comply with the restrictions of Section 1404.5. The referenced provisions restrict the use of wood veneer to installation on noncombustible exterior walls of the fire resistance required by Table 601, and not exceeding two stories in height.

## SECTION D106 REFERENCED STANDARDS

These standards are listed here for guidance; however, for enforcement, they shall be adopted and/or approved by the appropriate governmental authority (SASO or SBCNC) as per their mandates, before being considered part of this code.

<table>ASTM E84—Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building MaterialsD102.2.8NFPA 268—12Test Method for Determining Ignitability of Exterior Wall Assemblies Using a Radiant Heat Energy SourceD105.1NFPA 701—10Methods of Fire Tests for Flame-Propagation of Textiles and FilmsD102.2.8UL 723—08Standard for Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials, with Revisions through September 2010D102.2.8</table>

===== Page 2063 =====
## FIGURES OF APPENDIX D

MORE THAN 50% OF ALL BLOCKS IS BUILT UPON

- BUILT UPON GROUND AREA - FIRE DISTRICT

FIGURE D101.2.1
EXAMPLE OF FIRE DISTRICTS

===== Page 2064 =====
- BUILT UPON GROUND AREA

- FIRE DISTRICT

- BUFFER ZONE

FIGURE D101.2.2 BUFFER ZONES

===== Page 2065 =====
- BUILT UPON GROUND AREA

- FIRE DISTRICT

- BUFFER ZONE

FIGURE D101.2.3
ADDING ADJACENT BLOCKS

===== Page 2066 =====
(A)

(B)

FIGURE D104
BUILDINGS PARTIALLY WITHIN FIRE DISTRICTS

===== Page 2067 =====
This page left intentionally blank

===== Page 2068 =====
# APPENDIX E—SUPPLEMENTARY ACCESSIBILITY REQUIREMENTS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

## General Comments

As stated in Section 101.2.1, the provisions of the appendices do not apply unless specifically adopted. Chapter 11 sets forth requirements for accessibility to buildings and their associated sites and facilities for people with physical disabilities. This appendix was added to address accessibility in construction for items that were not typically enforceable through the traditional code enforcement process but were in the drafts for the 2004 Americans with Disabilities Act/Architectural Barriers Act (ADA/ABA) Accessibility Guidelines, now also called the 2010 ADA Standard for Accessible Design.

Section E101 contains the broad scope statement of the appendix and identifies the baseline criteria for accessibility as being in compliance with this appendix and ICC A117.1-2009. Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities (ICC A117.1). ICC A117.1 is the consensus national standard that sets forth the details, dimensions and construction specifications for accessibility.

Section E102 contains definitions of terms that are associated with accessibility used in this appendix that are not found in Chapter 2.

Section E103 contains additional requirements for interior accessible routes. An accessible route is a key component of the built environment that provides a person with a disability access to spaces, elements, facilities and buildings.

Section E104 contains various accessibility requirements that are unique to specific occupancies and are applicable in addition to other general requirements of this chapter. Specific provisions unique to transient lodging and Group I-3 facilities are included.

Section E105 contains various requirements that are applicable to special equipment provided for public use, including requirements for portable toilet and bathing rooms; laundry equipment; gaming and vending machines; mailboxes; automatic teller machines (ATMs) and fare machines; and two-way communication systems.
Section E106 contains special criteria for public telephones, including TTY requirements.

Section E107 sets forth requirements for signage identifying permanent designations, such as room numbers in a hospital, directional and informational signs, and signage specifically related to the transportation facilities identified in Section E108, Section E109 and Section E110.

Section E108 lists criteria specific to bus stops and terminals.

Section E109 lists criteria specific to fixed transportation facilities and stations, such as train stations.

Section E110 lists criteria specific to airports.

Section E111 enumerates the standards referenced in this appendix.

## Purpose

The Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (Access Board) has revised and updated its accessibility guidelines for buildings and facilities covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) and the Architectural Barriers Act of 1968 (ABA). The final ADA/ABA Guidelines, published by the Access Board in September 2004, will serve as the basis for the minimum standards when adopted by other federal agencies responsible for issuing enforceable standards. The guidelines have been adopted by the Government Service Administration (GSA), the Post Office, the Department of Defense, the Department of Transportation and the Department of Justice (DOJ). When the DOJ officially adopted the guidelines, it renamed them the 2010 ADA Standard for Accessible Design (2010 ADA Standard). The plan is to eventually use this document in place of the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standard (UFAS) and the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG). Refer to the Access Board website (www.accessboard.gov) for the current status of this adoption process. The 2010 ADA Standard is mandatory as of March 15, 2013, for all alterations and new construction.

Appendix E includes scoping requirements from the 2010 ADA Standard that are not in Chapter 11 or otherwise mentioned or

===== Page 2069 =====
mainstreamed throughout the code. Items in the appendix deal with topics not typically addressed in building codes. For example, items in Section E102 through Section E107 are not part of the "built" environment, as they can be added, modified or removed without a building permit and without notifying the building official. Section E108 through Section E110 deal specifically with transportation facilities. While there has been an attempt to include all provisions in the 2010 ADA Standard that are not in SBC 201, at this time, the efforts are ongoing. Code users should refer to the DOJ website for the revised ADA regulations at www.ada.gov.

This appendix is being included in the code for the convenience of building owners and designers who are required to comply with the 2010 ADA Standard and for the benefit of jurisdictions that may wish to go beyond the traditional boundary of the code and formally adopt these additional 2010 ADA Standard requirements. The requirements within the code indicate what is required and enforceable by the building official. The appendix includes items that are outside the scope of code enforcement, but must be complied with in addition to the code requirements to satisfy the 2010 ADA Standard.

## SECTION E101 GENERAL

E101.1 Scope. The provisions of this appendix shall control the supplementary requirements for the design and construction of facilities for accessibility for individuals with disabilities.

This section establishes the scope of the appendix as providing for design and construction of facilities for accessibility to individuals with disabilities other than items covered under Chapter 11. Items in the appendix are not enforceable under the typical code review process because these items can be altered or removed without notification to the building official. Items in this appendix are included in the 2010 ADA Standard.

E101.2 Design. Technical requirements for items herein shall comply with this code and ICC A117.1.

This section establishes the primary and fundamental relationship of ICC A117.1 to the code. The code text is intended to “scope,” or provide thresholds, for application of required accessibility features. The referenced standard contains technical provisions indicating how compliance with the code is achieved. In short, this appendix specifies what, when and how many accessible features are required; the referenced standard ICC A117.1 indicates how to make these features accessible. Compliance with both the scoping and technical standard is necessary for accessibility.

## SECTION E102 DEFINITIONS

E102.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of this code for general definitions.

This section contains definitions of terms that are associated with the subject matter of this appendix.

Definitions of terms can help in the understanding and application of the code requirements. The purpose for including these definitions within this appendix is because appendices are not considered part of the code requirements unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

CLOSED-CIRCUIT TELEPHONE. A telephone with a dedicated line such as a house phone, courtesy phone or phone that must be used to gain entrance to a facility.

Telephones described in this definition are utilized in hotels, apartments, airports, hospitals and similar facilities. Access to these systems is important to provide communication throughout a facility.

MAILBOXES. Receptacles for the receipt of documents, packages or other deliverable matter. Mailboxes include, but are not limited to, post office boxes and receptacles provided by commercial mail-receiving agencies, apartment houses and schools.

The definition for “Mailboxes” clarifies that the scope of this provision is meant to address all types of facilities where a person could receive correspondence, packages or written notifications. The description includes post office boxes, mailboxes in the lobby of an apartment building or mailboxes in the lobby of a college dorm.

TRANSIENT LODGING. A building, facility or portion thereof, excluding inpatient medical care facilities and long-term care facilities, that contains one or more dwelling units or sleeping units. Examples of transient lodging include, but are not limited to, resorts, group homes, hotels, motels, dormitories, homeless shelters, halfway houses and social service lodging.

Transient lodging facilities, such as hotels, typically provide short-term stays; however, this definition also includes facilities that provide longer-term stays, such as dormitories. The 30-day or less stay typically associated with transient lodging is not applicable in this definition. The key is whether sleeping or dwelling units are provided. The exclusions are for inpatient and long-term care facilities, such as hospitals and nursing homes. Additionally,

===== Page 2070 =====
this would not be applicable to permanent lodging facilities with dwelling units, such as apartments, condominiums or townhouses.

## SECTION E103 ACCESSIBLE ROUTE

E103.1 Raised platforms. In banquet rooms or spaces where a head table or speaker's lectern is located on a raised platform, an accessible route shall be provided to the platform.

An accessible route is required to a temporary raised platform utilized for a speaker or head table. An accessible route would not be required to a raised platform used for other purposes, such as a band. Access to permanently raised platforms or stages is addressed in Chapter 11.

## SECTION E104 SPECIAL

## OCCUPANCIES

E104.1 General. Transient lodging facilities shall be provided with accessible features in accordance with Section E104.2. Group I-3 occupancies shall be provided with accessible features in accordance with Section E104.2.

The following sections address communication feature requirements for transient lodging facilities and jails (Group I-3).

E104.2 Communication features. Accessible communication features shall be provided in accordance with Sections E104.2.1 through E104.2.4.

Rooms with communication features are intended for persons with hearing impairments. The communication features offer an alternative means for communication, either through a phone system or to know when someone is at the door and to check who they are. Examples of communication features are telephones, doorbells and peepholes (see ICC A117.1 Section 1006). In units required to have accessible communication features, the designer should consider compatibility with different types of adaptive equipment used by people with hearing impairments. Telephone interface jacks should be compatible with both digital and analog signal use. If an audio headphone jack is provided on a speaker phone, a cutoff switch can be included in the jack so that insertion of the jack cuts off the speaker. If a telephone-like handset is used, the external speakers can be turned off when the handset is removed from the cradle. For headset or external amplification system compatibility, a standard subminiature jack installed in the telephone will provide the most flexibility. Peepholes in doors should be installed at heights for standing persons.

ICC A117.1 Section 1006 also includes information on visible notification for fire alarms. Since that is part of the building alarm system, requirements are scoped in the code in Section 907.5.2.3 and its subsections.

E104.2.1 Transient lodging. In transient lodging facilities, sleeping units with accessible communication features shall be provided in accordance with Table E104.2.1. Units required to comply with Table E104.2.1 shall be dispersed among the various classes of units.

In transient lodging facilities, an alternative notification system for persons with hearing impairments must be offered in the number of dwelling and sleeping units specified in Table E104.2.1 (see the definition for "Dwelling units" and "Sleeping units" in Chapter 2). The number of dwelling or sleeping units that are required to have accessible communication features depends on the number of units provided. The number of accessible communication features is based on the number of units, not the number of beds. The rooms with accessible communication features are not required to be the same rooms that contain features to make them accessible to persons using wheelchairs, since the features serve different needs. Requirements for communication features within dwelling and sleeping units are found in Section 1006 of ICC A117.1.

E104.2.2 Group I-3. In Group I-3 occupancies at least 2 percent of the total number of general holding cells and general housing cells equipped with audible emergency notification systems, and not less than one cell, shall be provided with visual notification devices. Permanently installed telephones within the cell shall comply with E104.2.4.

Jails are required to have a fire alarm system in accordance with Section 907.2.6. When inmates or detainees are allowed independent means of egress, a minimum of 2 percent of the cells must have visible of as well as audible alarm notification. The code and Section 702.1 of ICC A117.1 both reference NFPA 72 for installation requirements. If cells also have permanently installed telephones, 2 percent of the telephones shall have a visible notification device as well as volume control and a place to plug in a TTY. The visual notification device for the phone cannot be connected to the visual alarms for the fire alarm system.

E104.2.3 Dwelling units and sleeping units. Where dwelling units and sleeping units are altered or added, the requirements of Section E104.2 shall apply only to the units being altered or added until the number of units with accessible communication features complies with the minimum number required for new construction.

When transient lodging dwelling and sleeping units are altered or added, only these units are

===== Page 2071 =====
counted to determine the number of units that will require accessible communication features. Once the entire building meets the number required for new construction, no additional accessible communication features are required. This is consistent with the intent in SBC 901 expressed for when Accessible and Type A units are required in existing buildings.

E104.2.4 Notification devices. Visual notification devices shall be provided to alert room occupants of incoming telephone calls and a door knock or bell. Notification devices shall not be connected to visual alarm signal appliances. Permanently installed telephones shall have volume controls and an electrical outlet complying with ICC A117.1 located within 1.2 m of the telephone to facilitate the use of a TTY.

A type of visual notification, such as a flashing light, must be provided in the hotel rooms specified in Table E104.2.1. The purpose of the visual notification is to alert a person with a hearing impairment to incoming phone calls or someone knocking at the door. The notification cannot be connected to any type of visual alarm system.

ICC A117.1 also requires a peephole, so that once the visible doorbell flashes, the person in the room can visually verify who is on the other side of the door. The doorbell height should be based on a standing person.

If phones are provided within the dwelling or sleeping unit, they must be equipped with a volume control and be located within 1.2 m of an electrical outlet to accommodate a TTY. Specific requirements for telephones are provided in Section 704 of ICC A117.1.

## SECTION E105 OTHER FEATURES AND FACILITIES

E105.1 Portable toilets and bathing rooms.

Where multiple single-user portable toilet or bathing units are clustered at a single location, at least 5 percent, but not less than one toilet unit or bathing unit at each cluster, shall be accessible. Signs containing the International Symbol of Accessibility shall identify accessible portable toilets and bathing units.

Exception: Portable toilet units provided for use exclusively by construction personnel on a construction site.

When portable toilets are provided for special events, at least 5 percent must be accessible. A "cluster" is a group of toilets adjacent or in close proximity to one another. This is consistent with the requirements for sinks in Section 1110.3. Appropriate signage is also required. If portable toilets are provided for personnel on a construction site, they are not required to be accessible. This is consistent with Section 1103.2.5. Technical requirements for bathroom and signage are found in Sections 602 and 703 of ICC A117.1, respectively.

E105.2 Laundry equipment. Where provided in spaces required to be accessible, washing machines and clothes dryers shall comply with this section.

When laundry facilities are provided that are open to the general public, or are associated with Accessible, Type A or B units, the washers and dryers must be accessible in accordance with Sections E105.2.1 and E105.2.2. This is consistent with Section 1108.3. The requirements are based on the washers or dryers provided in each space, not the total within the building. For example, a dorm with a single washer and dryer on each floor of a building should provide an accessible washer and dryer in each location.

E105.2.1 Washing machines. Where three or fewer washing machines are provided, at least one shall be accessible. Where more than three washing machines are provided, at least two shall be accessible.

When three or fewer washing machines are provided in a laundry room, at least one must meet the requirements for accessibility in Section 611 in ICC A117.1 for clear floor space, operable parts and height. In larger facilities, at least two washers must be accessible. Requirements include criteria for clear floor space to access the unit; operable parts that meet height, graspability and force requirements; and the location of doors to access the interior of the appliance. There are different requirements for equipment based on if the machines are top loaders or front loaders.

Clothes dryers. Where three or fewer clothes dryers are provided, at least one shall be accessible. Where more than three clothes dryers are provided, at least two shall be accessible.

The same criteria for washers is expected for dryers (see commentary, Section E105.2.1).

E105.3 Gaming machines, depositories, vending machines, change machines and similar equipment. At least one of each type of depository, vending machine, change machine and similar equipment shall be accessible. Two percent of gaming machines shall be accessible and provided with a front approach. Accessible gaming machines shall be distributed throughout the different types of gaming machines provided.

Exception: Drive-up-only depositories are not required to comply with this section.

All types of self-service machinery must be accessible. Examples include the book return

===== Page 2072 =====
at a library, a change machine at a laundry machine or a soda machine. A drive-up-only depository, such as a drive-up night deposit at a bank, is not required to be accessible. To be accessible, the equipment must meet the provisions for clear floor space and height and have operable parts within reach ranges in accordance with Section 309 of ICC A117.1. While not addressed in the 2010 ADA Standard, gaming machines were added as consistent with other types of self-service machines to allow equal access. See the commentary to Section 1110.16 for further information on gaming machines.

E105.4 Mailboxes. Where mailboxes are provided in an interior location, at least 5 percent, but not less than one, of each type shall be accessible. In residential and institutional facilities, where mailboxes are provided for each dwelling unit or sleeping unit, accessible mailboxes shall be provided for each unit required to be an Accessible unit.

Whenever mailboxes are provided, such as in an office building lobby, at least 5 percent are required to be accessible. In residential and institutional facilities, if mailboxes are provided for each unit, the mailboxes for the Accessible units must have adequate clear floor space and meet operable parts provisions. Examples of such types of facilities would be dorms, hotels, assisted living facilities or nursing homes. The number of Accessible units depends on the type of facility (see Section 1108 for requirements). To be accessible, the mailbox must meet the provisions for clear floor space, height and have operable parts within reach ranges in accordance with Section 309 of ICC A117.1.

E105.5 Automatic teller machines and fare machines. Where automatic teller machines or self-service fare vending, collection or adjustment machines are provided, at least one machine of each type at each location where such machines are provided shall be accessible. Where bins are provided for envelopes, wastepaper or other purposes, at least one of each type shall be accessible.

When such machines are provided, such as at banks and in bus or train stations, at least one of each type of machine must be accessible. If a site provides both interior and exterior ATMs, each such installation is considered a separate location. Accessible ATMs, including those with speech and those that are within reach of people who use wheelchairs, must provide all the functions provided to customers at that location at all times. For example, it is unacceptable for the accessible ATM only to provide cash withdrawals while inaccessible ATMs in that area also sell theater tickets or postage stamps. Specific criteria are provided in Section 707 of ICC A117.1.

E105.6 Two-way communication systems. Where two-way communication systems are provided to gain admittance to a building or facility or to restricted areas within a building or facility, the system shall be accessible.

Apartments or condominiums with secured entrances often have some type of two-way communication system at the entry so residents can screen persons entering the building. Specific criteria for systems connected with dwelling or sleeping units are provided in Sections 1006.6 and 1006.7 of ICC A117.1. Similar provisions would be applicable to two-way communication systems provided at other locations, such as office buildings and other facilities where access to the building or restricted spaces are dependent on two-way communication systems.

This two-way communication system is different than the two-way communication systems that are required as part of accessible means of egress (see Sections 1009.6.5 and 1009.8) or occupant evacuation elevators (see Section 3008.6.6); or the two-way system within a high-rise exit stairway (see Section 403.5.3.1).

## SECTION E106 TELEPHONES

E106.1 General. Where coin-operated public pay telephones, coinless public pay telephones, public closed-circuit telephones, courtesy phones or other types of public telephones are provided, accessible public telephones shall be provided in accordance with Sections E106.2 through E106.5 for each type of public telephone provided. For purposes of this section, a bank of telephones shall be considered two or more adjacent telephones.

Many types of public phones are provided, such as pay telephones, courtesy phones throughout airports, house phones in hotels, entrance phones in apartment complexes, etc. Wherever such phones are provided, at least one of each type must comply with Sections E106.2 through E106.5. A bank of telephones is defined as two or more telephones in one location.

It is not the intent of these provisions to require telephones. This is applicable only where telephones are provided.

E106.2 Wheelchair-accessible telephones. Where public telephones are provided, wheelchair-accessible telephones shall be provided in accordance with Table E106.2.

===== Page 2073 =====
Exception: Drive-up-only public telephones are not required to be accessible.

For each type of public telephone provided, the number of phones specified in Table E106.2 must be accessible. Specific criteria are provided in Section 704.2 of ICC A117.1.

If single telephones are provided in several locations or one bank of telephones is provided on a floor level or over a site, then at least one of each type must be accessible. The accessible telephone can be accessed using a parallel approach or a forward approach. If two or more banks are provided on a floor level or over a site, at least one telephone at each location must be accessible.

E106.3 Volume controls. All public telephones provided shall have accessible volume control.

Every public telephone must have volume controls and be identified with appropriate signage. Amplifiers on pay phones are located in the base of the handset or are built into the telephone. Most are operated by pressing a button or key. If the microphone in the handset is not being used, a mute button that temporarily turns off the microphone can also reduce the amount of background noise that the person can hear in the earpiece. Consider compatibility issues when matching an amplified handset with a phone or phone system. Amplified handsets that can be switched with pay telephone handsets are available. Specific criteria are found in Section 704.3 of ICC A117.1.

E106.4 TTYs. TTYs shall be provided in accordance with Sections E106.4.1 through E106.4.9.

TTYs are defined in ICC A117.1 as “machinery or equipment that employs interactive, graphic communications through the transmission of coded signals across the standard telephone network.” The term “TTY” also refers to devices known as text telephones and TDDs. Text telephones enable a person with a hearing impairment to utilize a telephone to send and receive text messages. Consideration should be given to phone systems that can accommodate both digital and analog transmissions for compatibility with digital and analog TTYs. Sections E106.4.1 through E106.4.4 indicate when TTYs are required within a bank of telephones, on a floor, within a building or on a site (see Commentary Figure E106.4). More than one section could apply. Sections E106.4.5 through E106.4.8 are special requirements to specific types of sites. Section E106.4.9 deals with appropriate signage.
E106.4.1 Bank requirement. Where four or more public pay telephones are provided at a bank of telephones, at least one public TTY shall be provided at that bank.

Exception: TTYs are not required at banks of telephones located within 60 m of, and on the same floor as, a bank containing a public TTY.

A TTY is required wherever four or more telephones are located together. If another bank is located both on the same floor and within 60 m of the TTY, that bank is not required to contain a TTY.

E106.4.2 Floor requirement. Where four or more public pay telephones are provided on a floor of a privately owned building, at least one public TTY shall be provided on that floor. Where at least one public pay telephone is provided on a floor of a publicly owned building, at least one public TTY shall be provided on that floor.

This section is similar to Section E106.4.1; however, the number of phones on the floor is counted, instead of within a bank. The term “publicly owned building” is intended to apply to facilities such as government buildings, libraries, schools, police stations, fire stations, park district buildings, etc.

E106.4.3 Building requirement. Where four or more public pay telephones are provided in a privately owned building, at least one public TTY shall be provided in the building. Where at least one public pay telephone is provided in a publicly owned building, at least one public TTY shall be provided in the building.

This section is similar to Sections E106.4.1 and E106.4.2; however, the number of phones in a building is counted, instead of within a bank or on a floor. In some situations, one TTY can satisfy more than one requirement. For example, the TTY required for a bank of phones could also satisfy the requirement for a TTY on an

E106.4.4 Site requirement. Where four or more public pay telephones are provided on a site, at least one public TTY shall be provided on the site.

This section is similar to Sections E106.4.1, E106.4.2 and E106.4.3; however, the number of phones on a site is counted. In some situations, one TTY can satisfy more than one requirement. For example, the TTY required for a bank of phones could also satisfy the requirement for the TTY for the building. However, the requirement for a TTY on an

===== Page 2074 =====
exterior site cannot be met by installing a TTY inside the building due to the phones in the building typically not being available 24 hours a day.

E106.4.5 Rest stops, emergency road stops and service plazas. Where a public pay telephone is provided at a public rest stop, emergency road stop or service plaza, at least one public TTY shall be provided.

A TTY is required at these types of facilities regardless of the number of phones provided. The possibility of emergencies or a need for assistance at these locations increases the need for someone to be able to make a telephone call.

E106.4.6 Hospitals. Where a public pay telephone is provided in or adjacent to a hospital emergency room, hospital recovery room or hospital waiting room, at least one public TTY shall be provided at each such location.

In hospitals, when phones are located for public use in an emergency room, recovery room or waiting room, a TTY is required at each location. The possibility of emergencies or a need for assistance at these locations increases the need for someone to be able to make a telephone call.

E106.4.7 Transportation facilities. Transportation facilities shall be provided with TTYs in accordance with Sections E109.2.5 and E110.2 in addition to the TTYs required by Sections E106.4.1 through E106.4.4.

Transportation facilities, such as bus stations, train stations and airports, have specific requirements as stated in Sections E106.4.5 and E110.2. Additionally, they must comply with the requirements based on the number of telephones in a bank, on a floor, within a building or on a site.

E106.4.8 Detention and correctional facilities. In detention and correctional facilities, where a public pay telephone is provided in a secured area used only by detainees or inmates and security personnel, then at least one TTY shall be provided in at least one secured area.

Specific criteria are provided for the detainee side of detention and correctional facilities. Phones available on the public side should be provided in Sections E106.4.1 through E106.4.4.

E106.4.9 Signs. Public TTYs shall be identified by the International Symbol of TTY complying with ICC A117.1. Directional signs indicating the location of the nearest public TTY shall be provided at banks of public pay telephones not containing a public TTY. Additionally, where signs provide direction to public pay telephones, they shall also provide direction to public TTYs. Such signs shall comply with visual signage requirements in ICC A117.1 and shall include the International Symbol of TTY.

Signage must be provided indicating the location of TTYs. Technical requirements for signage can be found in Sections 703.2 and 703.6 of ICC A117.1.

E106.5 Shelves for portable TTYs. Where a bank of telephones in the interior of a building consists of three or more public pay telephones, at least one public pay telephone at the bank shall be provided with a shelf and an electrical outlet.

Exceptions:

1. In secured areas of detention and correctional facilities, if shelves and outlets are prohibited for purposes of security or safety shelves and outlets for TTYs are not required to be provided.

2. The shelf and electrical outlet shall not be required at a bank of telephones with a TTY.

If a bank of telephones has three or more public telephones, a shelf and electrical outlet must be provided to allow a person with a hearing impairment to utilize his or her own portable TTY. In a bank of four or more phones, a public TTY is required (see Section E106.4.1); therefore, a shelf and outlet for a portable TTY are not required within the same bank. Due to security concerns, there may be situations in jails where the shelf and outlet for a portable TTY is not required. Technical requirements for the shelf can be found in Section 704.6 of ICC A117.1.

## SECTION E107 SIGNAGE

E107.1 Signs. Required accessible portable toilets and bathing facilities shall be identified by the International Symbol of Accessibility.

Accessible portable toilets must be identified (see Section E105.2).

E107.2 Designations. Interior and exterior signs identifying permanent rooms and spaces shall be visual characters, raised characters and braille complying with ICC A117.1. Where pictograms are provided as designations of interior rooms and spaces, the pictograms shall have visual characters, raised characters and braille complying with ICC A117.1.

Exceptions:

1. Exterior signs that are not located at the door to the space they serve are not required to comply.

2. Building directories, menus, seat and row designations in assembly areas, occupant names, building addresses and company

===== Page 2075 =====
names and logos are not required to comply.

3. Signs in parking facilities are not required to comply.

4. Temporary (seven days or less) signs are not required to comply.

5. In detention and correctional facilities, signs not located in public areas are not required to comply.

This section applies to signs that provide designations, labels or names for interior rooms or spaces where the sign is not likely to change over time. Examples include room numbers in hospitals or hotels, restrooms, room names in conference centers, etc. Where permanent signage is provided, signage consisting of letters that meet both the visual and raised letter requirements and braille must also be provided (see Commentary Figure E107.2). While most of the time this is one sign, the visual signage could be provided on a different sign where being located higher might make it more visible.

When pictograms are utilized to identify a space, such as the women's restroom, they must also have braille. Pictograms that provide information about a space, such as "no smoking" or the International Symbol of Accessibility, are not required to have text descriptors. For signage requirements, reference Section 703 of ICC A117.1. Exceptions are provided for types of signs where it may not be effective or practical to provide signage that needs to be felt to be read. Examples would be the remote sign at the street indicating the name or occupant of the building, the menu above a take-out counter, temporary signage or building directories.

E107.3 Directional and informational signs. Signs that provide direction to, or information about, permanent interior spaces of the site and facilities shall contain visual characters complying with ICC A117.1.

Exception: Building directories, personnel names, company or occupant names and logos, menus and temporary (seven days or less) signs are not required to comply with ICC A117.1.

* Directional information must meet requirements for font style, location, finish and contrast in order for signage to be readable by persons with limited vision (see Commentary Figure E107.3). The characters should contrast as much as possible with their background. Additional factors affecting the readability of signage include lighting, surface glare and text uniformity. When making color choices, remember that a percentage of the population is color blind; therefore, some color combinations may not have adequate contrast for these individuals (for example, red and blue). Color blindness is typically a genetic condition, and it is much more common in men than in women. Approximately one in 12 men has at least some color perception problems. Less common are acquired deficiencies that stem from injury, disease or the aging process. Also, although not called “color blindness,” when people age, their corneas typically turn yellowish, severely hampering their ability to see violet and blue colors. The exception is for signage that may be changeable, such as building directories, personnel names, etc. For requirements for this signage, reference Section 703.2 of ICC A117.1.

E107.4 Other signs. Signage indicating special accessibility provisions shall be provided as follows:

1 At bus stops and terminals, signage must be provided in accordance with Section E108.4.

2 At fixed facilities and stations, signage must be provided in accordance with Sections E109.2.2 through E109.2.2.3.

3 At airports, terminal information systems must be provided in accordance with Section E110.3.

This section is a reference to additional signage requirements found in subsequent sections. This was done in an effort to include all signage requirements in one section.

## SECTION E108 BUS STOPS

E108.1 General. Bus stops shall comply with Sections E108.2 through E108.5.

Bus stops and terminals provide access to public transportation and are considered an essential service; therefore, access in these facilities is of special concern. Technical requirements for transportation facilities are found in Section 805 of ICC A117.1.

E108.2 Bus boarding and alighting areas. Bus boarding and alighting areas shall comply with Sections E108.2.1 through E108.2.4.

“Kneeling” buses (those with a lift) deploy a ramp to allow access by persons with physical disabilities. When new bus stop pads are constructed to allow use of these buses, the requirements in Sections E108.2.1 through E108.2.4 are applicable. At bus stops where a shelter is provided, the bus stop pad can be located either within or outside the shelter.

E108.2.1 Surface. Bus boarding and alighting areas shall have a firm, stable surface.

To allow proper deployment of the ramp and approach by a person in a wheelchair, a firm, stable surface must be used for the pad.

===== Page 2076 =====
Typically, this will be some form of concrete or asphalt.

E108.2.2 Dimensions. Bus boarding and alighting areas shall have a clear length of 2.5 m minimum, measured perpendicular to the curb or vehicle roadway edge, and a clear width of 1.5 m minimum, measured parallel to the vehicle roadway.

To allow maneuvering for both the ramp and the person using the wheelchair, a bus stop pad should be a minimum of 2.5 m deep and 1.5 m wide.

E108.2.3 Connection. Bus boarding and alighting areas shall be connected to streets, sidewalks or pedestrian paths by an accessible route complying with Section 1104.

All bus stop pads must have an accessible route leading from public access points, such as the sidewalk, to the bus stop pad. A pad allowing for kneeling buses is not beneficial if the pad itself is not accessible. This is not intended to require a curb cut immediately adjacent to the bus stop since most kneeling buses pick up on the side and directly from the sidewalk. However, if the type of kneeling bus that serves this route provides access through the rear of the bus instead of the side, a curb cut in the immediate area may be needed.

E108.2.4 Slope. Parallel to the roadway, the slope of the bus boarding and alighting area shall be the same as the roadway, to the maximum extent practicable. For water drainage, a maximum slope of 1:48 perpendicular to the roadway is allowed.

The bus stop pad should be as flat as possible to allow a wheelchair user to wait at this location comfortably. A maximum slope of one unit vertical in 48 units horizontal (1:48) is allowed for drainage of rainwater to the curb and gutter drainage system provided along the edge of the road.

E108.3 Bus shelters. Where provided, new or replaced bus shelters shall provide a minimum clear floor or ground space complying with ICC A117.1, Section 305, entirely within the shelter. Such shelters shall be connected by an accessible route to the boarding area required by Section E108.2.

A wheelchair parking space [750 mm by 1225 mm] must be provided within the bus shelter. If the shelter is small enough to meet the alcove requirements in Section 305.7 of ICC A117.1, additional space is required for maneuvering. In addition, an accessible route is required from the bus shelter to the bus stop (see Section E108.2).

E108.4 Signs. New bus route identification signs shall have finish and contrast complying with ICC A117.1. Additionally, to the maximum extent practicable, new bus route identification signs shall provide visual characters complying with ICC A117.1.

Exception: Bus schedules, timetables and maps that are posted at the bus stop or bus bay are not required to meet this requirement.

The bus routes must be identified with visual characters that have light/dark contrast and a nonglare surface so they are easily readable. As much as practicable, the signage must also meet the requirements in Section 703.2 of ICC A117.1, for character form and spacing, line spacing and mounting height. There is an exception for schedules, timetables and maps due to the amount of information provided.

E108.5 Bus stop siting. Bus stop sites shall be chosen such that, to the maximum extent practicable, the areas where lifts or ramps are to be deployed comply with Sections E108.2 and E108.3.

Whenever possible, bus stop sites should be chosen based on efforts to comply with the previous requirements for bus stop pads and bus shelters. Site constraints, such as a steeply inclined street, may not always make this practical.

## SECTION E109 TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES AND STATIONS

E109.1 General. Fixed transportation facilities and stations shall comply with the applicable provisions of Section E109.2.

Fixed transportation facilities and stations, such as train or light rail stations, provide access to public transportation and are considered an essential service; therefore, access in these facilities is of special concern. Technical requirements for transportation facilities can be found in Section 805 of ICC A117.1.

E109.2 New construction. New stations in rapid rail, light rail, commuter rail, intercity rail, high speed rail and other fixed guideway systems shall comply with Sections E109.2.1 through E109.2.8.

All new construction involved with fixed guideway systems, including stations and terminals, is required to comply with this section.

E109.2.1 Station entrances. Where different entrances to a station serve different transportation fixed routes or groups of fixed routes, at least one entrance serving each group or route shall comply with Section 1104.

A fixed guideway system, such as a commuter train system, may have separate platforms or entrances for a group of routes. When this is the case, at least one accessible route leading from public access points (e.g., public sidewalk, public parking, etc.) to the transit platform utilized for each group must be

===== Page 2077 =====
provided. When transit systems are underground, an accessible route must provide access to each subway station. As much as possible, the accessible entrance should be

the same as the main entrance to the facility.
E109.2.2 Signs. Signage in fixed transportation facilities and stations shall comply with Sections E109.2.2.1 through E109.2.2.3.

Specific requirements are listed for visual signage, or signs that have visual and raised lettering and braille identification, and informational signs.

E109.2.2.1 Raised character and braille signs. Where signs are provided at entrances to stations identifying the station or the entrance, or both, at least one sign at each entrance shall be raised characters and braille. A minimum of one raised character and braille sign identifying the specific station shall be provided on each platform or boarding area. Such signs shall be placed in uniform locations at entrances and on platforms or boarding areas within the transit system to the maximum extent practicable.

Exceptions:

1. Where the station has no defined entrance but signs are provided, the raised characters and braille signs shall be placed in a central location.

2. Signs are not required to be raised characters and braille where audible signs are remotely transmitted to hand-held receivers, or are user or proximity actuated.

When identification signs are provided at a facility entrance, a sign with raised letters and braille for the visually impaired must also be provided. A raised letter and braille sign must also be provided at each platform or boarding area. The location of such signage should be consistent throughout the rail system. Signage must include both raised letters and braille and meet the requirements of Section 703 of ICC A117.1. Raised letter and braille signage is not required when information is provided by alternative audible means. The purpose of Exception 2 is to allow for emerging technologies such as an audible sign system using infrared transmitters and receivers. These new systems may provide greater accessibility in the transit environment than traditional braille and raised letter signs. The transmitters are placed on or next to print signs and transmit their information to an infrared receiver that is held by a person. By scanning an area, the person will hear the sign. This means that signs can be placed well out of reach of braille readers, even on parapet walls and on walls beyond barriers. Additionally, such signs can be used to provide wayfinding information that cannot be efficiently conveyed on braille signs. This entrance signage can also be a visual sign, or the visual information may be located higher in order for more people to be able to see it.

E109.2.2.2 Identification signs. Stations covered by this section shall have identification signs containing visual characters complying with ICC A117.1. Signs shall be clearly visible and within the sightlines of a standing or sitting passenger from within the train on both sides when not obstructed by another train.

When identification signs are provided so that persons on the trains can identify the station, the signs must meet the requirements of Section 703.2 of ICC A117.1 for visual characters including font style, finish and contrast.

E109.2.2.3 Informational signs. Lists of stations, routes and destinations served by the station that are located on boarding areas, platforms or mezzanines shall provide visual characters complying with ICC A117.1. Signs covered by this provision shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be placed in uniform locations within the transit system.

Signs indicating stations, routes and destinations served by the train system accessed from that platform must comply with Section 703.2 of ICC A117.1 for visual characters including font style, finish and contrast. The location of such signage should be consistent throughout the system. Route maps are not required to comply with the informational sign requirements.

E109.2.3 Fare machines. Self-service fare vending, collection and adjustment machines shall comply with ICC A117.1, Section 707. Where self-service fare vending, collection or adjustment machines are provided for the use of the general public, at least one accessible machine of each type provided shall be provided at each accessible point of entry and exit.

Self-service fare machines must be accessible in accordance with Section 707 of ICC A117.1. The requirements are the same as for ATM machines. If self-service machines are provided, at least one accessible machine must be provided along the accessible route between the entrance and the platform.

E109.2.4 Rail-to-platform height. Station platforms shall be positioned to coordinate with vehicles in accordance with the applicable provisions of 36 CFR, Part 1192. Low-level platforms shall be 200 mm minimum above top of rail.

===== Page 2078 =====
Exception: Where vehicles are boarded from sidewalks or street level, low-level platforms shall be permitted to be less than 200 mm.

The height and position of a platform must be coordinated with the floor of the vehicles it serves to minimize the vertical and horizontal gaps, in accordance with the ADA Accessibility Guidelines for Transportation Vehicles (36 CFR Part 1192). The vehicle guidelines, categorized by bus, van, light rail, rapid rail, commuter rail and intercity rail are available at www.access-board.gov. The preferred alignment is a high platform, level with the vehicle floor. In some cases, the vehicle guidelines permit use of a low platform in conjunction with a lift or ramp. Most such low platforms must have a minimum height of 200 mm above the top of the rail. Some vehicles are designed to be boarded from a street or the sidewalk along the street and the exception permits such boarding areas to be less than 200 mm high.

E109.2.5 TTYs. Where a public pay telephone is provided in a transit facility (as defined by the Department of Transportation), at least one public TTY complying with ICC A117.1, Section 704.4, shall be provided in the station. In addition, where one or more public pay telephones serve a particular entrance to a transportation facility, at least one TTY telephone complying with ICC A117.1, Section 704.4, shall be provided to serve that entrance.

Due to the essential nature of the facility, at least one public telephone in a transit facility is required to have a permanent TTY in accordance with Section 704.4 of ICC A117.1. When a bank of four or more is provided at an entrance, at least one is required to have a permanent TTY in accordance with Section 704.4 of ICC A117.1 (see also commentary, Section E106.4.7).

E109.2.6 Track crossings. Where a circulation path serving boarding platforms crosses tracks, an accessible route shall be provided.

Exception: Openings for wheel flanges shall be permitted to be 65 mm maximum.

If people utilizing the train station must cross tracks to access the platform, it is necessary to provide an accessible route that takes into account the changes in elevation and gaps associated with such a route. Front wheels of wheelchairs are small, and if a person in a wheelchair got stuck while crossing the tracks, the consequences could be severe. If it is not possible to meet the criteria specified, an alternative accessible route must be provided.
This requirement is not a requirement for track crossings remote from the boarding platform.
E109.2.7 Public address systems. Where public address systems convey audible information to the public, the same or equivalent information shall be provided in a visual format.

If a public address system is utilized within a facility to provide information to passengers, there must be an alternative means for providing the same information to persons with a hearing impairment.

Clocks. Where clocks are provided for use by the general public, the clock face shall be uncluttered so that its elements are clearly visible. Hands, numerals and digits shall contrast with the background either light-on-dark or dark-on light. Where clocks are mounted overhead, numerals and digits shall comply with visual character requirements.

Clocks provided in transportation facilities must be readily distinguishable. When clocks are provided overhead, the numerals must comply with Section 703.2 of ICC A117.1 for visual characters.

## SECTION E110 AIRPORTS

E110.1 New construction. New construction of airports shall comply with Sections E110.2 through E110.4.

Airports provide access to public transportation and are considered an essential service; therefore, access in these facilities is of special concern. Technical requirements for transportation facilities can be found in Section 805 of ICC A117.1.

E110.2 TTYs. Where public pay telephones are provided, at least one TTY shall be provided in compliance with ICC A117.1, Section 704.4. Additionally, if four or more public pay telephones are located in a main terminal outside the security areas, a concourse within the security areas or a baggage claim area in a terminal, at least one public TTY complying with ICC A117.1, Section 704.4, shall also be provided in each such location.

Due to the essential nature of the facility, at least one public telephone in an airport facility is required to have a permanent TTY in accordance with Section 704.4 of ICC A117.1. Given the restricted areas in an airport, when a bank of four or more phones is provided at either side of security check-points or in a baggage claim area, at least one phone in each bank is required to have a permanent TTY in accordance with Section 704.4 of ICC A117.1 (see also commentary, Section E106.4.7).

E110.3 Terminal information systems. Where terminal information systems convey audible

===== Page 2079 =====
information to the public, the same or equivalent information shall be provided in a visual format.

If a public address system is utilized within a facility to provide information to passengers, there must be an alternative means for providing the same information to persons with a hearing impairment. ICC A117.1 now provides information for variable message signage that could be utilized to provide criteria for size, contrast, fonts, etc.

E110.4 Clocks. Where clocks are provided for use by the general public, the clock face shall be uncluttered so that its elements are clearly visible. Hands, numerals and digits shall contrast with the background either light-on-dark or dark-on light. Where clocks are mounted overhead, numerals and digits shall comply with visual character requirements.

Clocks provided in transportation facilities must be readily distinguishable. When clocks are provided overhead, the numerals must comply with Section 703.2 of ICC A117.1 for visual characters.

This section lists the standards that are referenced in Appendix E. They are listed here and not in Chapter 35 of the code, since appendices are not considered part of the code unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

===== Page 2080 =====
## SECTION E111 REFERENCED STANDARDS

These standards are listed here for guidance; however, for enforcement, they shall be adopted and/or approved by the appropriate governmental authority (SASO or SBCNC) as per their mandates, before being considered part of this code.

DOJ 36 Americans with E109.2.4

CFR Disabilities Act (ADA)

Part Accessibility

1192 Guidelines for Transportation Vehicles (ADAAG). Washington, DC: Department of Justice, 1991

SBC Saudi Building Code-E102.1

201 General

ICC Accessible and Usable E101.2.

A117.1-Buildings and E104.2.4,

09 Facilities E106.4.9,

E107.2.

E107.3.

E108.3.

E108.4.

E109.2.2.2.

E109.2.2.3.

E109.2.3.

E109.2.5.

E110.2

===== Page 2081 =====
## Bibliography

The following resource materials were used in the preparation of the commentary for this appendix chapter of the code:

1 2010 ADA Standard for Accessible Design. Washington, DC: Department of Justice, Sept. 15, 2010.

2 “Accessibility and Egress for People with Physical Disabilities.” CABO Board for the Coordination of the Model Codes Report: October 5, 1993.

3 Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board, 36 CFR, Parts 1190 and 1191 Final Rule, The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Accessibility Guidelines); Architectural Barriers Act (ABA) Accessibility Guidelines. Washington, DC: July 23, 2004.

4 DOJ 28 CFR, Part 36-91, Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Washington, DC: Department of Justice, 1991.

5 DOJ 28 CFR, Part 36-91 (Appendix A), ADA Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG). Washington, DC: Department of Justice, 1991.

6 DOJ 36 CFR, Part 1192/DOT 49 CFR, Part 38, ADA Accessibility Guidelines for Transportation Vehicles (ADAAG). Washington, DC: Department of Justice, 1991.

7 DOT 49 CFR, Part 37, Transportation Services for Individuals with Disabilities (ADA). Washington, DC: Department of Transportation, 1999.

8 FED-STD-795-88, Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards. Washington, DC: General Services Administration; Department of Defense; Department of Housing and Urban Development; U.S. Postal Service, 1988.

9 ICC A117.1-2009, Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities. Washington, DC: International Code Council, 2003.

10 NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm Code. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2007.

===== Page 2082 =====
## TABLES AND FIGURES OF APPENDIX E

TABLE E104.2.1

DWELLING OR SLEEPING UNITS WITH ACCESSIBLE COMMUNICATION FEATURES

<table>TOTAL NUMBER OF DWELLING OR SLEEPING UNITS PROVIDEDMINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF DWELLING OR SLEEPING UNITS WITH ACCESSIBLE COMMUNICATION FEATURES112 to 25226 to 50451 to 75776 to 1009101 to 15012151 to 20014201 to 30017301 to 40020401 to 50022501 to 1,0005 % of total1,001 and over50 plus 3 for each 100 over 1,000</table>

TABLE E106.2

WHEELCHAIR-ACCESSIBLE TELEPHONES

<table>NUMBER OF TELEPHONES PROVIDED ON A FLOOR, LEVEL OR EXTERIOR SITEMINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF WHEELCHAIR-ACCESSIBLE TELEPHONES1 or more single unit1 per floor, level and exterior site1 bank1 per floor, level and exterior site2 or more banks1 per bank</table>

FIGURE E106.4
EXAMPLE OF TELEPHONE WITH TTY

===== Page 2083 =====
FIGURE E107.2
EXAMPLE OF ROOM DESIGNATION SIGNAGE

===== Page 2084 =====
FIGURE E107.3
EXAMPLE OF DIRECTIONAL SIGNAGE

===== Page 2085 =====
This page left intentionally blank

===== Page 2086 =====
# APPENDIX F—RODENTPROOFING

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

## General Comments

The requirements of this appendix apply only where it has been specifically adopted by the governing jurisdiction, as stated in Section 101.2.1. The provisions of this appendix are minimum mechanical methods to prevent the entry of rodents. If a food supply is available, a rodent problem cannot be eliminated solely by these methods. However, removal of the food supply and general cleanliness and maintenance of the premises will have a significant impact.

## Purpose

The purpose of this appendix is to provide regulations for rodentproofing for health purposes.

## SECTION F101 GENERAL

F101.1 General. Buildings or structures and the walls enclosing habitable or occupiable rooms and spaces in which persons live, sleep or work, or in which feed, food or food stuffs are stored, prepared, processed, served or sold, shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this section.

In an effort to protect the public health and welfare and to prevent the spread of disease, this section requires all rooms and spaces used for living, sleeping or working and all spaces used for the storage, preparation or serving of food to be protected from rodents in the manner described in the code. Note that a building used for the storage of materials other than foodstuffs is not required to comply with the requirements of this section.

F101.2 Foundation wall ventilation openings. Foundation wall ventilation openings shall be covered for their height and width with perforated sheet metal plates no less than 1.8 mm thick, expanded sheet metal plates not less than 1.2 mm thick, cast-iron grills or grating, extruded aluminum load-bearing vents or with hardware cloth of 0.9 mm wire or heavier. The openings therein shall not exceed 6.5 mm.

The purpose of this section is to protect ventilation openings in foundation walls from the entry of rodents. The thickness of metal shields and the maximum openings specified in this section are necessary for the shields to be effective.
F101.3 Foundation and exterior wall sealing. Annular spaces around pipes, electric cables, conduits or other openings in the walls shall be protected against the passage of rodents by closing such openings with cement mortar, concrete masonry or noncorrosive metal.

During construction, the openings in foundation and exterior walls that are made for pipes, electrical cables, conduits and the like are significantly larger than the component that passes through the wall. These openings around the component are required to be closed for rodentproofing.

F101.4 Doors. Doors on which metal protection has been applied shall be hinged so as to be free swinging. When closed, the maximum clearance between any door, door jamb and sills shall be not greater than 9.5 mm.

This section addresses wood doors located at ground or basement floor levels. Solid sheet metal protection is needed to stop rodents from gnawing their way through the wood into areas where food is located. The limitation on the clearance between the door and the adjacent door jamb and sill is to deter rodent entry.

F101.5 Windows and other openings. Windows and other openings for the purpose of light or ventilation located in exterior walls within 600 mm above the existing ground level immediately below such opening shall be covered for their entire height and width, including frame, with hardware cloth of at least 0.9 mm wire or heavier.

The requirement for wire screens or "hardware cloth" for rodent protection applies only to openings 600 mm or less from the ground. This is a minimum requirement and will not keep all rodents out of the building.

## F101.5.1 Rodent-accessible openings.

Windows and other openings for the purpose of light and ventilation in the exterior walls not covered in this chapter, accessible to rodents by way of exposed pipes, wires, conduits and other appurtenances, shall be covered with wire cloth of at least 0.9 mm wire. In lieu of wire cloth covering, said pipes, wires, conduits and other appurtenances shall be blocked from rodent usage by installing solid sheet metal guards 0.6 mm thick or heavier. Guards shall be fitted around pipes, wires, conduits or other appurtenances. In addition, they shall be fastened securely to and shall extend perpendicularly from the exterior wall for a

===== Page 2087 =====
minimum distance of 300 mm beyond and on either side of pipes, wires, conduits or appurtenances.

This section addresses screen requirements for windows or other openings that are higher than 600 mm from grade and are made rodent accessible by pipes, wires, conduits and the like. The window or other opening is required to be screened or rodent guards are to be installed on the pipes, wires or conduits so that the window or other opening is not accessible to rodents.

## F101.6 Pier and wood construction.

The requirements of Sections F101.6.1 and F101.6.2 apply only if the building does not have a continuous foundation wall of treated wood, concrete or coated metal. An example of such a building is a post and beam wood-frame building with a slab on grade. Also note that these requirements apply if the building contains habitable or occupiable rooms in which persons live, sleep or work, or in which foodstuffs are stored, prepared, processed, served or sold. Thus, a storage or utility building used for storage of materials other than foodstuffs is not required to meet this section, even though it does not have a continuous foundation wall.

F101.6.1 Sill less than 300 mm above ground. Buildings not provided with a continuous foundation shall be provided with protection against rodents at grade by providing either an apron in accordance with Section F101.6.1.1 or a floor slab in accordance with Section F101.6.1.2.

See the commentary to Section F101.6 for an explanation of when the requirements of this section apply. This section cites two alternative methods that meet the requirements: an apron or a concrete grade floor. Either of these methods provides effective rodent protection.

F101.6.1.1 Apron. Where an apron is provided, the apron shall be not less than 200 mm above, nor less than 600 mm below, grade. The apron shall not terminate below the lower edge of the siding material. The apron shall be constructed of an approved non-decayable, water-resistant rodent-proofing material of required strength and shall be installed around the entire perimeter of the building. Where constructed of masonry or concrete materials, the apron shall be not less than 100 mm in thickness.

The apron is usually a concrete, masonry or treated wood wall. Each material meets the requirement of this section. The extension into the ground is to prevent rodents from burrowing underground into the building. Note that a concrete floor slab is not required where the apron is used for rodent protection in accordance with Section F101.6.2.
F101.6.1.2 Grade floors. Where continuous concrete-grade floor slabs are provided, open spaces shall not be left between the slab and walls, and openings in the slab shall be protected.

This is the second option for rodent protection in Section F101.6.1. When a grade floor that meets the requirements of this section is installed, the apron described in Section F101.6.1.1 is not required.

The grade floor is required to have any openings protected from rodents. For example, if the floor slab has an opening where drain pipes go through it, the area around the pipe is to be sealed with material that will keep rodents out of the building.

F101.6.2 Sill at or above 300 mm above ground. Buildings not provided with a continuous foundation and that have sills 300 mm or more above ground level shall be provided with protection against rodents at grade in accordance with any of the following:

1 Section F101.6.1.1 or F101.6.1.2.

2 By installing solid sheet metal collars at least 0.6 mm thick at the top of each pier or pile and around each pipe, cable, conduit, wire or other item that provides a continuous pathway from the ground to the floor.

3 By encasing the pipes, cables, conduits or wires in an enclosure constructed in accordance with Section F101.6.1.1.

See the commentary to Section F101.6 for an explanation of when the requirements of this section apply. Where the sill height is 300 mm or more above the ground, this section provides two additional acceptable methods for rodent protection versus methods for instances where the sill height is less than 300 mm.

Methods 2 and 3 described in this section provide the rodent barrier directly around the pipes, cables, conduits or wires that would otherwise be a continuous pathway from the ground to the raised floor.

===== Page 2088 =====
This page left intentionally blank

===== Page 2089 =====
# APPENDIX G—FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION

Not Applicable to K.S.A.

===== Page 2090 =====
This page left intentionally blank

===== Page 2091 =====
# APPENDIX H—SIGNS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

## General Comments

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance, as stated in Section 101.2.1. The regulations contained in this appendix were prompted by improper design, erection, placement, location and maintenance of outdoor signs. Improperly designed and installed signs pose a hazard to people and property. Improperly wired signs or improperly maintained electrical signs can cause fires. The criteria in this chapter are straightforward, which, in turn, facilitates straightforward enforcement. Section H102 contains definitions for nine distinct types of signs.

## Purpose

The purpose of this appendix is to locate in one place the provisions that regulate construction or protection requirements for outdoor signs. This appendix also provides the owner, designer, installer and maintainer of outdoor signs with minimum safe practices presented in performance language whenever possible, thus allowing the widest possible application.

## SECTION H101 GENERAL

H101.1 General. A sign shall not be erected in a manner that would confuse or obstruct the view of or interfere with exit signs required by Chapter 10 or with official traffic signs, signals or devices. Signs and sign support structures, together with their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in repair and in proper state of preservation. The display surfaces of signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times.

The provisions of this appendix are confined to that which is displayed in any manner out of doors for recognized advertising purposes. An orderly procedure is to be followed in erecting and maintaining outdoor signs. Outdoor signs must not block the view of signs regulated in Section 1013 that identify the location and path of travel to exits or street signs regulated by the jurisdiction. Signs must be properly maintained in accordance with this section, including corrosion prevention on all parts of the sign and its supports. Corrosion of a structural member results in loss of cross section, which could render that member incapable of handling the load of the sign or loads (wind, etc.) on the sign.
The building official has the authority to order the removal of a sign that is not maintained properly, as it can represent a hazard to the public and, therefore, can be determined to be unsafe (see Section 116).

H101.2 Signs exempt from permits. The following signs are exempt from the requirements to obtain a permit before erection:

1 Painted nonilluminated signs.

2 Temporary signs announcing the sale or rent of property.

3 Signs erected by transportation authorities.

4 Projecting signs not exceeding 0.25 m².

5 The changing of moveable parts of an approved sign that is designed for such changes, or the repainting or repositioning of display matter shall not be deemed an alteration.

The objective of this section is to describe when a permit is not required to regulate the erection, construction, alteration and maintenance of a new sign. Note that this section applies to new signs only, except for existing signs that are to be altered, and that the owner of an exempt sign is responsible for erecting and maintaining it in a safe manner (see Section H104.1 for a related issue).

A permit is not required for the erection of wall signs (commonly of limited area) without electrical service that, when not maintained, can be painted over or the surface repaired to its original state.

A sale or rental sign is temporary in nature, pertains to the premises on which it is placed and its installation is not likely to represent a hazard (for example, it is substantially fixed in place and without electrical service).

Regulation of street signs in the code would be redundant, since signs erected by the jurisdiction inevitably undergo one or more levels of regulatory review before installation. Directional (informational) signs in conjunction with transit lines, such as subways, trains, buses, ferries and airports, are exempt from permit requirements since it is generally not necessary for a jurisdiction to take out a permit for an activity it is performing.

Projecting signs that do not exceed an area of 0.25 m² do not require a permit, as the size limitation allows access for maintenance. The sign will likely be constructed so as not to create a hazard (for example, lack of headroom

===== Page 2092 =====
for pedestrians, protrusions into a walking surface and electrical supply disrepair).

When an existing sign is altered (i.e., enlarged, relocated, etc.), the alterations must comply with the requirements for new signs. A permit is required for such alterations. The exceptions to the requirements for alterations apply to a sign that has been designed and previously authorized (through the permit process) to have changeable or movable parts. Repainting or reposting of display matter (lettering) is not considered an alteration. If a sign is enlarged or relocated without a permit and, in turn, without a field inspection, it could add excessive loads to a roof, interfere with the exhaust or intake ventilation facilities from a building or create a potential hazard to the public.

## SECTION H102 DEFINITIONS

H102.1 General. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of this code for general definitions.

Definitions of terms that are associated with the content of this section are contained herein. These definitions can help in the understanding and application of the code requirements. The use and application of all defined terms are set forth in Section 202 of the code.

COMBINATION SIGN. A sign incorporating any combination of the features of pole, projecting and roof signs.

The purpose of this definition is to identify which combination of features constitutes a combination sign. These signs are characterized by being simultaneously supported partly by one or more poles, partly by the wall, partly by the roof of a structure or any combination thereof.

DISPLAY SIGN. The area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying the advertising message.

A display sign constitutes the surface of a sign where the contents of a message are arranged for display.

ELECTRIC SIGN. A sign containing electrical wiring, but not including signs illuminated by an exterior light source.

This definition states that an electrical sign is any sign activated or illuminated internally by means of electrical energy. Electric signs are characterized by the use of artificial light projecting through, but not reflecting off, its surface(s).

GROUND SIGN. A billboard or similar type of sign that is supported by one or more uprights, poles or braces in or upon the ground other than a combination sign or pole sign, as defined by this code.

This definition identifies those signs that are not part of other buildings or structures. The structural supports of these signs are such that the wind loading is directly transferred into its own foundation system rather than into other buildings or structures. Section H109.1 contains the specific material and height requirements of ground signs.

POLE SIGN. A sign wholly supported by a sign structure in the ground.

Pole signs are those where the structural supports are constructed so that loads are directly transferred to the ground.

PORTABLE DISPLAY SURFACE. A display surface temporarily fixed to a standardized advertising structure that is regularly moved from structure to structure at periodic intervals.

This definition identifies the surfaces available for displaying commercial or noncommercial advertising messages that are not permanently attached to a structure and are periodically placed at different locations by means of manual input.

PROJECTING SIGN. A sign other than a wall sign that projects from and is supported by a wall of a building or structure.

A projecting sign differs from a wall sign in that it projects from the wall that provides its support. Section H112 contains requirements for projecting signs to regulate their materials, maximum projections, clearances and structural capabilities.

ROOF SIGN. A sign erected on or above a roof or parapet of a building or structure.

This definition identifies that any exterior sign supported on the roof of a building or structure is considered a roof sign. Such a sign directly impacts the design of the roof because of increased wind drifting loads. Section H110.1 contains explicit material and clearance requirements along with height limitations for the erection of roof signs.

SIGN. Any letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, marquee sign, design, poster, pictorial, picture, stroke, stripe, line, trademark, reading matter or illuminated service, which shall be constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever, so that the same shall be used for the attraction of the public to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine or merchandise, whatsoever, which is displayed in any manner outdoors. Every sign shall be classified and conform to the requirements of that classification as set forth in this chapter.

This definition provides the basis for determining which building components are

===== Page 2093 =====
considered as signs, and thus must comply with the provisions of this appendix. For the purposes of the code, signs are always considered as exterior elements, since the code addresses the hazards associated with exterior exposure. Interior signs must meet the specific code requirements for the materials involved, along with the code provisions for interior finishes and trim (see Chapter 8). The code further subdivides signs into different groups, with specific requirements for each group.

SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure that supports or is capable of supporting a sign as defined in this code. A sign structure is permitted to be a single pole and is not required to be an integral part of the building.

Structures supporting signs, which may be affixed to the ground and include one or more columns, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground, are not required to be part of the building structural system.

WALL SIGN. Any sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of said wall.

This definition details those signs that are part of the wall surfaces of a building or structure, or which are separate signs and are then fastened to the wall surface. Wall signs are separately fastened signs of limited extension from the wall surface; otherwise, they become projecting signs. The code allows certain sized wall signs to be exempt from permit requirements (see Section H101.2). Section H111.1 specifies the material requirements and extension limitations of wall signs.

## SECTION H103 LOCATION

H103.1 Location restrictions. Signs shall not be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape or any window or door or opening used as a means of egress or so as to prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. A sign shall not be attached in any form, shape or manner to a fire escape, nor be placed in such manner as to interfere with any opening required for ventilation.

The intent of this section is to prohibit the installation of signs at locations that may interfere with either the evacuation process during an emergency situation or free movement throughout the roof of a building. Fire escapes and openings that are part of the means of egress or required for ventilation are to be free from obstructions that may affect their intended use.

## SECTION H104 IDENTIFICATION

H104.1 Identification. Every outdoor advertising display sign hereafter erected, constructed or maintained, for which a permit is required, shall be plainly marked with the name of the person, firm or corporation erecting and maintaining such sign and shall have affixed on the front thereof the permit number issued for said sign or other method of identification approved by the building official.

All signs must bear the name of the owner to identify the party responsible for installation and maintenance. The construction documents on file must show where such identification is located on each sign. If the sign is erected improperly or becomes damaged, the field inspector will be able to identify the responsible person to whom any notification is to be directed.

## SECTION H105 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION

H105.1 General requirements. Signs shall be designed and constructed to comply with the provisions of this code for use of materials, loads and stresses.

This section addresses the general requirements pertaining to the construction, design loads and working stresses of signs. The design and construction of signs must be in accordance with all of the pertinent requirements of the code. In many instances, structural calculations and the resulting design must be submitted showing the type of materials used, their strength capabilities and the loads and resultant stresses placed on the sign and its supports (see Chapter 16).

H105.2 Permits, drawings and specifications. Where a permit is required, as provided in 0, construction documents shall be required. These documents shall show the dimensions, material and required details of construction, including loads, stresses and anchors.

The intent of this section is to require construction documents when a permit is required for the erection of a sign. In order to grant a permit to the owner, the construction documents must contain plans and specifications in sufficient detail to allow the determination of code compliance. Section H104.1 affects this section in that it explains that the owner of a sign (new or altered) is not relieved from obtaining the necessary permit, even if he or she holds a building or other type of permit at the time the sign is under construction. The sign permit is usually a separate permit and may also require other related permits (e.g., electrical).

===== Page 2094 =====
H105.3 Wind load. Signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind pressure as provided for in Chapter 16.

A reference is made to Section 1609, which relates to wind loads. Consideration should also be given thereto, especially for signs with a significant horizontal surface such as marquee signs.

H105.4 Seismic load. Signs designed to withstand wind pressures shall be considered capable of withstanding earthquake loads, except as provided for in Chapter 16.

The designer and plan reviewer are to consider the provisions set forth in Section 1613 before the sign and its construction can be considered in compliance with the code.

H105.5 Working stresses. In outdoor advertising display signs, the allowable working stresses shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 16. The working stresses of wire rope and its fastenings shall not exceed 25 percent of the ultimate strength of the rope or fasteners.

Exceptions:

1. The allowable working stresses for steel and wood shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 22 and 23.

2. The working strength of chains, cables, guys or steel rods shall not exceed one-fifth of the ultimate strength of such chains, cables, guys or steel.

Consideration is to be given to the imposed loads and resultant working stresses in the design of signs. The allowable working stresses are to be evaluated in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 16. Structural members are to be of the appropriate size to support the loads applied to the sign (wind, etc.) or the load of the sign itself. All members and connections are to be sufficient to carry all design loads of Chapter 16 without exceeding the specified design values set forth in the referenced chapter.

An exception to this requirement applies only to steel and wood allowable working stresses, which are to comply with the provisions of Chapter 22 and 23. A limitation is placed on wire rope and fastening utilized as structural members supporting signs, where the working stresses are to be below 25 percent of the ultimate strength of the member. An exception to this limitation applies to chains, cables, guys or steel rods where the working stresses of such members may not exceed one-fifth of the ultimate strength of the members.

H105.6 Attachment. Signs attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely and securely fastened by means of metal anchors, bolts or approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to safely support the loads applied.

In accordance with this section, metal connectors are the prescriptive requirement for the support and transfer of loads when signs are bearing on walls, floors and roofs of masonry, concrete or steel construction. Metal connectors provide points of anchorage at intersecting components and are also used as bonding elements. Section 2103.4 contains the standards and material requirements for joint reinforcement, wire fabric, wire accessories, metal anchors, ties and accessories, and the required corrosion protection of these components.

## SECTION H106 ELECTRICAL

H106.1 Illumination. A sign shall not be illuminated by other than electrical means, and electrical devices and wiring shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401). Any open spark or flame shall not be used for display purposes unless specifically approved.

The reference to NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401) when dealing with electrical aspects is common throughout the Saudi Codes (see commentary, Chapter 27). Improperly installed lighting and wiring are potential fire or electrocution hazards. Other illumination, utilizing such means as flame or sparks, must be approved by the building official so that such an arrangement does not induce a fire hazard for which commensurate safety precautions are not considered.

H106.1.1 Internally illuminated signs. Except as provided for in Section 2611, where internally illuminated signs have facings of wood or of approved plastic complying with the requirements of Section 2606.4, the area of such facing section shall be not more than 11 m² and the wiring for electric lighting shall be entirely enclosed in the sign cabinet with a clearance of not less than 50 mm from the facing material. The dimensional limitation of 11 m² shall not apply to sign facing sections made from flame-resistant coated fabric (ordinarily known as "flexible sign face plastic") that weighs less than 675 g/m² and that, when tested in accordance with NFPA 701, meets the fire propagation performance requirements of both Test 1 and Test 2 or that, when tested in accordance with an approved test method, exhibits an average burn time of 2 seconds or less and a burning extent of 150 mm or less for 10 specimens.

This section applies to outdoor signs that are internally illuminated. The exception is a reminder that the area limitations of this section

===== Page 2095 =====
are not applicable to internally illuminated signs located within a building. Wood and approved plastic are limited because of the need to control the amount of combustibles incorporated into the sign. Once the amount of combustibles is limited, maintenance of a 50 mm clearance is still necessary between this material and electrical wiring. Square-meter limitations are not imposed on flame-resistant controlled fabrics that weigh less than 675 g/m², provided that the material meets the specific criteria listed. This is because of the low fuel content of such fabrics and the resulting lower potential for fire propagation. One standard that is referenced, NFPA 701, deals with not only average flame time and average length of char, but also outdoor conditions and weathering.

H106.2 Electrical service. Signs that require electrical service shall comply with NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401).

This section is concerned with sign wiring being installed in a safe and protected manner so as not to create a potential tripping or electrical shock hazard. Electrical safety is as important as structural safety when dealing with illuminated signs.

## SECTION H107 COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS

H107.1 Use of combustibles. Wood, plastics complying with the requirements of Section H107.1.1 or plastic veneer panels as provided for in Chapter 26, or other materials of combustible characteristics similar to wood, used for moldings, cappings, nailing blocks, letters and latching, shall comply with Section H109.1 and shall not be used for other ornamental features of signs, unless approved.

The use of combustibles for ornamentation and sign facings is addressed in Sections H107.1.1 and H107.1.2. The control of combustible signs and portions of signs is necessary to limit the fuel load that the combustible features add to a structure. The use of the term “approved” means approved by the building official in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26 and other applicable code sections. The reference to Section H109.1 controls the height at which combustibles may be used (see Section H109.1 for details).

## H107.1.1 Plastic materials.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, plastics that burn at a rate no faster than 65 mm/min when tested in accordance with ASTM D635 shall be approved for use as the display surface material and for the letters, decorations and facings on signs and outdoor display structures.
Plastic materials, mostly consisting of acrylics, that burn at a rate no faster than 65 mm/min when tested in accordance with ASTM D635, are to be considered approved plastics for use as display surface materials, numbers, ornaments and coverings on signs. ASTM D635, measures the burning rate of a small sample held horizontally and exposed to a Bunsen burner flame to compare the relative linear rate of burning, the extent and time of burning, or both, of plastics in the horizontal position.

H107.1.2 Electric sign faces. Individual plastic facings of electric signs shall not exceed 18 m \( ^{2} \)  in area.

Consistent with other provisions of the code to limit the spread of fire, this section places restrictions on the size of plastic facings utilized in signs activated by electrical means. This limitation is intended to control the amount of combustible materials that potentially soften or melt when subject to heat.

H107.1.3 Area limitation. If the area of a display surface exceeds 18 m², the area occupied or covered by plastics complying with Section H107.1.1 shall be limited to 18 m² plus 50 percent of the difference between 18 m² and the area of display surface. The area of plastic on a display surface shall not in any case exceed 100 m².

This section provides requirements for how to determine the permissible amount of combustible materials when the area of a display surface exceeds the 18 m² threshold. As an additional safeguard against exterior fire spread, the aggregate area of combustible materials covering a display surface should not exceed the sum of 18 m² and 50 percent of the difference between the limitation and the area of the display surface. However, at no time can the aggregate area of plastic in display surfaces occupy more than 100 m².

H107.1.4 Plastic appurtenances. Letters and decorations mounted on a plastic facing or display surface can be made of plastics complying with Section H107.1.1.

Under the provisions of this section, combustible lettering and ornaments are permitted to be mounted on display surfaces constructed of approved plastic materials.

## SECTION H108 ANIMATED DEVICES

H108.1 Fail-safe device. Signs that contain moving sections or ornaments shall have fail-safe provisions to prevent the section or ornament from releasing and falling or shifting its center of gravity more than 375 mm. The fail-safe device shall be in addition to the mechanism and the mechanism's housing that operate the movable section or ornament. The fail-safe device shall be capable of

===== Page 2096 =====
supporting the full dead weight of the section or ornament when the moving mechanism releases.

Animated signs may be operated for many hours at a time, perhaps even continuously. Thus, it is imperative that if the operating mechanism malfunctions, the animated part of the sign will not release or fall, creating a hazard or damaging property.

## SECTION H109 GROUND SIGNS

H109.1 Height restrictions. The structural frame of ground signs shall not be erected of combustible materials to a height of more than 10.5 m above the ground. Ground signs constructed entirely of noncombustible material shall not be erected to a height of greater than 30.5 m above the ground. Greater heights are permitted where approved and located so as not to create a hazard or danger to the public.

Combustible materials exceeding 10.5 m in height are prohibited in a sign's structural frame. This somewhat correlates with the height limitation for structures of Type V construction in Table 504.3. The primary concern is the sign and its structure's potential involvement in a fire conflagration. The height of a noncombustible sign structure is limited to 30.5 m so as to limit reasonably the area exposed to a sign or the sign's structural failure. The building official is permitted to approve signs that exceed 30.5 m in height, provided that a public hazard is not created. An example of this is an area remote from other buildings and occupied areas, where structural failure would not jeopardize the public.

H109.2 Required clearance. The bottom coping of every ground sign shall be not less than 900 mm above the ground or street level, which space can be filled with platform decorative trim or light wooden construction.

This section regulates the bottom clearance of ground signs. This clear space of 900 mm is permitted to be decorated with nonstructural or decorative trim or light wooden construction, provided this arrangement will not create a hazard.

H109.3 Wood anchors and supports. Where wood anchors or supports are embedded in the soil, the wood shall be pressure treated with an approved preservative.

The intent of this section is to require wood support members in direct contact with the earth to be preservative treated. This provision is consistent with the requirements of Section 2304.12.2.6. Typically, wood species that are untreated are susceptible to decay. However, when preservative treated with chemicals in accordance with standardized procedures, wood becomes less susceptible to failure due to decay and rot.

## SECTION H110 ROOF SIGNS

H110.1 General. Roof signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or other approved noncombustible material except as provided for in Sections H106.1.1 and H107.1. Provisions shall be made for electric grounding of metallic parts. Where combustible materials are permitted in letters or other ornamental features, wiring and tubing shall be kept free and insulated therefrom. Roof signs shall be so constructed as to leave a clear space of not less than 1.8 m between the roof level and the lowest part of the sign and shall have at least 1.5 m clearance between the vertical supports thereof. No portion of any roof sign structure shall project beyond an exterior wall.

Exception: Signs on flat roofs with every part of the roof accessible.

Section H110.1 controls the materials, bottom clearances and arrangements of roof signs (refer to definition of "Sign" in the Section H102.1 for special sign descriptions). Noncombustible materials are required for roof signs. This arrangement will not add to the fuel load present on the building (see Sections H106.1.1 and H107.1 for exceptions that deal with sign facings, electrical wiring and electrical clearances). Grounding of metal signs for lightning control and preventing electrical shock and fire is mandatory. A 1.8 m clear space is to be maintained between the bottom of the sign and the roof. This arrangement will enable wind to travel under the sign, thereby minimizing the collection of debris. It will also facilitate roof repair. An exception to these requirements applies to signs constructed on flat roofs where every portion of the roof is available for access.

H110.2 Bearing plates. The bearing plates of roof signs shall distribute the load directly to or upon masonry walls, steel roof girders, columns or beams. The building shall be designed to avoid overstress of these members.

The provisions of this section require bearing plates of roof signs to transfer the loads directly to masonry or steel structural members. The intent is to minimize the possibility of imposing additional loads on bearing plates not prepared to carry them, which may affect the structural stability of the roof sign. The structural design is to consider the load-carrying capability of the bearing plates to avoid distress of these elements.

H110.3 Height of solid signs. A roof sign having a solid surface shall not exceed, at any point, a height of 7.5 m measured from the roof surface.

===== Page 2097 =====
This section specifies a height limitation on roof signs of solid construction. The 7.5 m threshold provides a conservative criteria where solid signs are to remain stable against the forces of wind.

H110.4 Height of open signs. Open roof signs in which the uniform open area is not less than 40 percent of total gross area shall not exceed a height of 23 m on buildings of Type 1 or Type 2 construction. On buildings of other construction types, the height shall not exceed 12 m. Such signs shall be thoroughly secured to the building upon which they are installed, erected or constructed by iron, metal anchors, bolts, supports, chains, stranded cables, steel rods or braces and they shall be maintained in good condition.

An open sign is the opposite of a closed sign (see Section H110.5) in that the membranes and edges are substantially open, thus allowing wind loads to pass through without any significant structural effects. The code allows increased heights for open signs located on the roofs of buildings based on the type of construction. On buildings of combustible construction, the height is limited to 12 m, whereas on buildings of noncombustible construction, the height is permitted to be 23 m. Consistent with other provisions of the code, the use of noncombustible materials will not add to the fuel load present in the building. Open signs are to be properly anchored to their supporting structure and structural supports are to be kept in a proper state of preservation and free from rust to avoid failure of the members.

H110.5 Height of closed signs. A closed roof sign shall not be erected to a height greater than 15 m above the roof of buildings of Type 1 or Type 2 construction or more than 10.5 m above the roof of buildings of Type 3, 4 or 5 construction.

As in the previous section, there are different height limitations for closed signs located on the roofs of buildings. A closed sign usually consists of membranes containing the lettering or design fastened to the structural framework with its edges also enclosed. The 15 m threshold identifies the point at which wind loading on the sign becomes significant and a fire could go undetected for some time.

## SECTION H111 WALL SIGNS

H111.1 Materials. Wall signs that have an area exceeding  \( 3.75 \, m^{2} \)  shall be constructed of metal or other approved noncombustible material, except for nailing rails and as provided for in Sections H106.1.1 and H107.1.

This section regulates the materials used and the arrangement of wall signs (see the definition of "Wall sign"). Signs in excess of 3.75 m² must be constructed of noncombustible materials. Nailing rails and the exceptions regarding sign facings, electrical wiring and clearances to electrical wires, as stipulated in Section H107.1, are permitted. Signs of less than 3.75 m² may be of combustible construction. To date, experience has shown that fire exposure from a combustible sign of this size is minimal.

H111.2 Exterior wall mounting details. Wall signs attached to exterior walls of solid masonry, concrete or stone shall be safely and securely attached by means of metal anchors, bolts or expansion screws of not less than 10 mm diameter and shall be embedded at least 125 mm. Wood blocks shall not be used for anchorage, except in the case of wall signs attached to buildings with walls of wood. A wall sign shall not be supported by anchorage secured to an unbraced parapet wall.

This section indicates the size, type and location of masonry anchors intended to be used for the attachment of signs to exterior walls of masonry construction. Note that the anchorage required is a minimum 10 mm metal anchor, bolt or expansion screw embedded a minimum of 125 mm in solid masonry, concrete or stone construction. The use of wood blocking for attachment of wall signs is prohibited except in buildings where the exterior walls are constructed of wood. The anchors of wall signs are not permitted to be supported by unbraced parapet walls that are not providing adequate structural support for load transfer.

H111.3 Extension. Wall signs shall not extend above the top of the wall or beyond the ends of the wall to which the signs are attached unless such signs conform to the requirements for roof signs, projecting signs or ground signs.

Signs cannot extend above the top of the wall (access to the roof must be maintained for repair and firefighting) or beyond the ends of the wall. The signs must be kept on the property, unless exceptions for other types of signs apply.

## SECTION H112 PROJECTING SIGNS

H112.1 General. Projecting signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or other noncombustible material and securely attached to a building or structure by metal supports such as bolts, anchors, supports, chains, guys or steel rods. Staples or nails shall not be used to secure any projecting sign to any building or structure. The dead load of projecting signs not parallel to the building or structure and the load due to wind pressure shall be supported with chains, guys or steel rods having net cross-sectional dimension of

===== Page 2098 =====
not less than 10 mm diameter. Such supports shall be erected or maintained at an angle of at least 45 percent with the horizontal to resist the dead load and at angle of 45 percent or more with the face of the sign to resist the specified wind pressure. If such projecting sign exceeds 3 m \( ^{2} \)  in one facial area, there shall be provided at least two such supports on each side not more than 2.5 m apart to resist the wind pressure.

This section establishes explicit provisions for the construction and anchorage of projecting signs (see the definition of "Projecting sign"). Projecting signs are required to be constructed of metal or approved noncombustible materials and are to be anchored to a building or structure only by metal bolts, anchors, supports, chains, guys or steel rods. Metal chains, guys or steel bolts with a minimum 10 mm diameter are specifically prescribed to support the dead loads and wind pressures imposed on projecting signs perpendicular to the building or structure. These anchorage requirements are based on common construction techniques and are considered to provide a minimum resistance to pressures caused by wind loads. To resist the dead loads, these structural supports are to be located at a minimum angle of 45 degrees. However, to resist wind pressures, these supports are to be at an angle of more than 45 degrees with the face of the sign. The use of staples or nails is prohibited for the attachment of projecting signs to buildings or structures. These limitations recognize that nails, when subjected to wind forces, may not provide adequate connection strength and structural resistance. Not less than two supports are to be provided with a space between them of at least 2.5 m when the facial area of projecting signs exceeds 3 m \( ^{2} \) . The intent is to provide a minimum number of structural elements so that adequate load transfer is provided.

H112.2 Attachment of supports. Supports shall be secured to a bolt or expansion screw that will develop the strength of the supporting chains, guys or steel rods, with a minimum 16 mm bolt or lag screw, by an expansion shield. Turnbuckles shall be placed in chains, guys or steel rods supporting projecting signs.

This section stipulates that structural supports of projecting signs are to be secured to a bolt or lag screw with a diameter of at least 16 mm. The bolt or expansion screw is to develop the strength of the supporting members. Structural supports are to be provided with turnbuckles to adjust the tension of the members.

H112.3 Wall mounting details. Chains, cables, guys or steel rods used to support the live or dead load of projecting signs are permitted to be fastened to solid masonry walls with expansion bolts or by machine screws in iron supports, but such supports shall not be attached to an unbraced parapet wall. Where the supports must be fastened to walls made of wood, the supporting anchor bolts must go through the wall and be plated or fastened on the inside in a secure manner.

This section specifies the use of expansion bolts or machine screws in iron supports to fasten tension members required to support the live or dead loads of projecting signs at all locations of solid masonry walls, except on unbraced parapets. Where walls constructed of wood are provided for fastening the supports, anchor bolts are required to penetrate the wall and be securely plated or fastened on the inside face of the wall.

H112.4 Height limitation. A projecting sign shall not be erected on the wall of any building so as to project above the roof or cornice wall or above the roof level where there is no cornice wall; except that a sign erected at a right angle to the building, the horizontal width of which sign is perpendicular to such a wall and does not exceed 450 mm, is permitted to be erected to a height not exceeding 600 mm above the roof or cornice wall or above the roof level where there is no cornice wall. A sign attached to a corner of a building and parallel to the vertical line of such corner shall be deemed to be erected at a right angle to the building wall.

Consistent with other provisions of the code, projecting signs cannot extend beyond the ends of the wall or above the roof or cornice wall of a building. An exception to this limitation is projecting signs constructed perpendicular to the building, with a horizontal width of 450 mm and a height not exceeding 600 mm above the top of the roof or cornice wall or roof level without a cornice wall. In accordance with this section, signs attached to a corner of a building and parallel to the corner's vertical line are considered projecting signs constructed at a right angle to the building wall. Thus, their extension beyond the end of the wall is permitted within the limitations prescribed in this section.

H112.5 Additional loads. Projecting sign structures that will be used to support an individual on a ladder or other servicing device, whether or not specifically designed for the servicing device, shall be capable of supporting the anticipated additional load, but not less than a 450 N concentrated horizontal load and a 1350 N concentrated vertical load applied at the point of assumed or most eccentric loading. The building component to

===== Page 2099 =====
which the projecting sign is attached shall also be designed to support the additional loads.

The intent of this section is to require additional structural capability in projecting signs that may be subjected to loads during maintenance procedures. The face of the sign and the supports, therefore, must be capable of withstanding not only an additional concentrated horizontal load anywhere on the face of the sign, but also a 1350 N concentrated load acting vertically down at the point most eccentric from the sign fasteners. The building or building component to which the sign is attached must be capable of withstanding the resultant load.

## SECTION H113 MARQUEE SIGNS

H113.1 Materials. Marquee signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or other approved noncombustible material except as provided for in Sections H106.1.1 and H107.1.

A marquee sign is always supported by the building or structure and projects from the building into surrounding spaces. Marquee signs are usually located on canopies or other extensions of the building or structure to obtain a greater visual effect. The code has specific provisions for marquee signs concerning allowable materials. Marquee signs must be of metal or approved noncombustible materials. Sections H113.2 through H113.4 regulate the attachment, dimensions and height limitations of a marquee sign. Section H107.1 describes exceptions regarding sign facings, electrical wiring and clearances to electrical wires.

H113.2 Attachment. Marquee signs shall be attached to approved marquees that are constructed in accordance with Section 3106.

Marquee signs are attached to a structure called a "marquee." The marquee is to be designed and constructed in accordance with Section H113.1. A marquee sign should not be confused with a projecting sign (see Section H112.1).

H113.3 Dimensions. Marquee signs, whether on the front or side, shall not project beyond the perimeter of the marquee.

Marquees accommodate a specially designed marquee sign arrangement. In other words, the sign fits into the marquee. A projecting sign cannot be placed on a marquee because the sign would project beyond the perimeter of the marquee.

H113.4 Height limitation. Marquee signs shall not extend more than 1.8 m above, nor 300 mm below such marquee, but under no circumstances shall the sign or signs have a vertical dimension greater than 2.5 m.
This section requires marquee signs to project less than 1.8 m above and not more than 300 mm below the marquee structure. The total vertical dimension of the marquee sign is limited to 2.5 m. The intent of this section is to place a limitation on structures with a higher fuel load due to decorations incorporated on the sign that are subject to outdoor conditions and weathering.

## SECTION H114 PORTABLE SIGNS

H114.1 General. Portable signs shall conform to requirements for ground, roof, projecting, flat and temporary signs where such signs are used in a similar capacity. The requirements of this section shall not be construed to require portable signs to have connections to surfaces, tie-downs or foundations where provisions are made by temporary means or configuration of the structure to provide stability for the expected duration of the installation.

Portable signs must conform to the general regulations as set forth in this appendix for all signs, except that temporary support or stability methods may be utilized when approved by the building official. Portable signs must also conform to the requirements of this section commensurate to the manner in which the sign is used. This section establishes criteria for those types of signs that are neither mounted on buildings nor provided with a permanent foundation support. A typical example of a portable sign is a trailer-mounted illuminated sign. Such signs are used temporarily at locations and do not require any permanent support to resist wind overturning loads because of their limited size. The code contains electrical supply requirements for portable signs.

Glazing materials installed in all types of signs are required to conform to the limitations of Table 4-A. This table details the maximum allowable size, thickness limitations and type of glass panels to be used in signs. Glass subject to unusual loading conditions may require special engineering analysis to determine its size.

The requirements of Table 4-B are applicable only for projecting signs constructed in accordance with Section H112.

## SECTION H115 REFERENCED STANDARDS

These standards are listed here for guidance; however, for enforcement, they shall be adopted and/or approved by the appropriate governmental authority (SASO or SBCNC) as per their mandates, before being considered part of this code.

===== Page 2100 =====
<table>ASTMTest Method for RateH107.1.1D635—of Burning and/or10Extent and Time of Burning of Plastics in a Horizontal PositionNFPANational ElectricalH106.1,70—11CodeH106.2NFPAMethods of Fire TestH106.1.1701—10for Flame Propagation of Textiles and Films</table>

===== Page 2101 =====
## TABLES OF APPENDIX H

TABLE 4-A

SIZE, THICKNESS AND TYPE OF GLASS PANELS IN SIGNS

<table><td colspan="2">Maximum size of exposed panel<td rowspan="2">Minimum thickness of glass (mm)<td rowspan="2">Types of glassAny dimension (mm)Area (m²)7500.3 m²4 mmPlain, plate or wired11250.45 m²5 mmPlain, plate or wired36002.3 m²6 mmPlain, plate or wired&gt;3600&gt;2.3 m²6 mmwired glass</table>

TABLE 4-B

THICKNESS OF PROJECTION SIGN

<table>Projection (mm)Maximum thickness (mm)1500600120075090090060010503001200</table>

===== Page 2102 =====
This page left intentionally blank

===== Page 2103 =====
# APPENDIX I—PATIO COVERS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

## General Comments

These provisions are optional. They apply only if specifically adopted by the jurisdiction as stated in Section 101.2.1. The requirements are intended to apply only to patio covers associated with residential dwelling units.

## Purpose

These provisions for patio covers are intended to simplify the requirements for residential patio installations.

## SECTION 1101 GENERAL

I101.1 General. Patio covers shall be permitted to be detached from or attached to dwelling units. Patio covers shall be used only for recreational, outdoor living purposes and not as carports, garages, storage rooms or habitable rooms.

The provisions of this appendix are intended to be used in conjunction with Groups R-1, R-2, R-3 and U with attached or detached patio covers. Patio covers must be used for recreational or outdoor living purposes only and not for the uses generally ascribed to Group U and R occupancies. If used for storage or as a garage, an entire new fuel load is introduced, thereby qualifying the patio cover as a private garage governed by Sections 312 and 406.

## SECTION 1102 DEFINITION

I102.1 General. The following term shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meaning shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of this code for general definitions.

The definition of the term that is associated with the content of this appendix is provided. This definition can help in the understanding and application of the code requirements. It is important to emphasize that this term is not exclusively related to this appendix, but is applicable everywhere the term is used throughout the code. The purpose for including this definition within this appendix is to provide more convenient access to it rather than referring back to Chapter 2.

PATIO COVER. A structure with open or glazed walls that is used for recreational, outdoor living purposes associated with a dwelling unit.

A patio cover is defined in order to make a distinction between carports, garages and covered awnings. The code does not consider a patio a hazardous condition with a high fuel load; therefore, special construction or consideration is not necessary. Patio covers are distinct from sunrooms, which are addressed in Chapter 12 as well as in SBC 601.

## SECTION 1103 EXTERIOR WALLS AND OPENINGS

I103.1 Enclosure walls. Enclosure walls shall be permitted to be of any configuration, provided the open or glazed area of the longer wall and one additional wall is equal to at least 65 percent of the area below a minimum of 2 m of each wall, measured from the floor. Openings shall be permitted to be enclosed with insect screening, translucent or transparent plastic conforming to the provisions of Section 2606 through 2610 glass conforming to the provisions of Chapter 24, or any combination of the foregoing.

Despite its name, a patio cover is not limited to being simply a cover. The walls of the patio cover may be enclosed, provided a minimum of 65 percent of the longest wall and one other wall are of a material that will let light come into the area beneath the cover. The code allows simple screening, plastic materials or glass; however, the code doesn't mandate any of these. The patio cover can simply be open to the surrounding yard. Finally, the code clearly allows a mixture of materials for providing the enclosure.

I103.2 Light, ventilation and emergency egress. Exterior openings of the dwelling unit required for light and ventilation shall be permitted to open into a patio structure. However, the patio structure shall be unenclosed if such openings are serving as emergency egress or rescue openings from sleeping rooms. Where such exterior openings serve as an exit from the dwelling unit, the patio structure, unless unenclosed, shall be provided with exits conforming to the provision of Chapter 10.

A patio is allowed to be placed over an opening that is to be used as a means of natural light or ventilation required by Chapter 12. Where openings of a building required for light and ventilation open to a patio cover, no further requirements are imposed on the patio cover other than the provisions of this appendix. However, if the patio covers an opening used for egress by the occupants of the building, the patio must provide an appropriate means of

===== Page 2104 =====
egress conforming with the provisions of Chapter 10.

## SECTION 1104 HEIGHT

I104.1 Height. Patio covers shall be limited to one-story structures not more than 3.6 m in height.

The maximum height of a patio cover is 3.6 m. A patio cover that is taller than 3.6 m should not be built under the provisions of this appendix, but would need to comply with provisions of the rest of the code.

## SECTION 1105 STRUCTURAL

## PROVISIONS

I105.1 Design loads. Patio covers shall be designed and constructed to sustain, within the stress limits of this code, all dead loads plus a minimum vertical live load of 0.5 kN/m \( ^{2} \) . Such patio covers shall be designed to resist the minimum wind and seismic loads set forth in this code.

This section provides a reduced roof live load from that stated in the code for typical roofs. The minimum value for the roof live load of the patio is 0.5 kN/m \( ^{2} \) . Standard load combinations (as presented within the code) are still required to be considered when designing patio cover structures. Load combinations shall include dead, roof live, wind and seismic forces.

I105.2 Footings, not applicable to KSA.

===== Page 2105 =====
This page left intentionally blank

===== Page 2106 =====
# APPENDIX J—GRADING

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

## General Comments

This appendix contains grading provisions that address soil-related hazards such as slope failure, landslides and erosion. Jurisdictions that include mountainous or hilly terrain often encounter grading work in connection with large commercial developments or the development of residential subdivisions that can pose grading problems that are not addressed by any other section of the code. Note that only excavation, grading and fill in connection with foundation construction is regulated by Chapter 2 of SBC 303.

## Purpose

This appendix provides a set of grading requirements that can be utilized in lieu of (or in addition to) developing local regulations. Where grading is an important consideration, a comprehensive code is available simply by adopting this appendix. It is intended to provide consistent and uniform code requirements anywhere grading is considered an issue.

## SECTION J101 General.

J101.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter apply to grading, excavation and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments. Where conflicts occur between the technical requirements of this chapter and the geotechnical report, the geotechnical report shall govern.

This section states the scope of the chapter and also states that the soils report, which is required by Section J104.3, would supersede the requirements of this chapter when a conflict exists. This gives the professional responsible for the report much latitude to provide recommendations that are appropriate for each individual site.

J101.2 Flood hazard areas. Unless the applicant has submitted an engineering analysis, prepared in accordance with standard engineering practice by a registered design professional, that demonstrates the proposed work will not result in any increase in the level of the base flood, grading, excavation and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, shall not be permitted in floodways that are in flood hazard areas or in flood hazard areas where design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been designated.
See the commentaries to Sections G103.4 and G103.5.

## SECTION J102 Definitions

J102.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein. Refer to Chapter 2 of this code for general definitions.

BENCH. A relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed.

This term is used to identify the steps that are cut into an existing slope prior to placing fill over that slope (see Figure J-1).

COMPACTION. The densification of a fill by mechanical means.

This definition aides the application of Section J107.5, which is applicable to all fill material.

CUT. See “Excavation.”

Earthwork is typically referred to as “cut” and “fill.” The term “cut” is synonymous with excavation.

DOWN DRAIN. A device for collecting water from a swale or ditch located on or above a slope, and safely delivering it to an approved drainage facility.

The inclusion of a definition for “Down drain” helps to clarify the term and make the requirements of Section J109.2 enforceable.

EROSION. The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water or ice.

This definition describes what is a naturally occurring process of wearing away the ground surface. The provisions of this chapter regulate grading with the intent to minimize the susceptibility to erosion of man-made slopes primarily due to surface water.

EXCAVATION. The removal of earth material by artificial means, also referred to as a cut.

Excavations are regulated by Section J106.

FILL. Deposition of earth materials by artificial means.

Earthwork is typically referred to as “cut” and “fill.” Fill is regulated by Section J107.

GRADE. The vertical location of the ground surface.

The elevation of the existing ground surface is usually established by topographic surveys. This must be done in order to methodically evaluate a site to determine the need for regrading. The process of developing an appropriate grading plan leads to the required

===== Page 2107 =====
finished grade that must be achieved either by excavating where the existing grade is above the desired finished grade or by filling where the existing grade is below the desired finished grade.

GRADE, EXISTING. The grade prior to grading.
See the definition of "Grade."

GRADE, FINISHED. The grade of the site at the conclusion of all grading efforts.

See the definition of "Grade."

GRADING. An excavation or fill or combination thereof.

This definition clarifies that the term “grading” refers to all earthwork.

KEY. A compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a slope.

This term refers to the level area that creates a notch at the bottom of a slope requiring benching in accordance with Section J107.3 (see Figure J-1).

All slope references in the chapter have been modified to show the horizontal/vertical relationship.

SLOPE. An inclined surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.

This definition establishes that slopes in this chapter are expressed in the form of the horizontal-to-vertical distance ratio.

TERRACE. A relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope for drainage and maintenance purposes.

This definition helps to clarify the term “terrace” and makes the requirements of Section J109.2 enforceable.

## SECTION J103 Permits Required

J103.1 Permits required. Except as exempted in Section J103.2, no grading shall be performed without first having obtained a permit therefor from the building official. A grading permit does not include the construction of retaining walls or other structures.

A grading permit does not include the construction of retaining walls or other structures, since that is covered by SBC 303.

J103.2 Exemptions. A grading permit shall not be required for the following:

1 Grading in an isolated, self-contained area, provided there is no danger to the public and that such grading will not adversely affect adjoining properties.

2 Excavation for construction of a structure permitted under this code.

3 Cemetery graves.

4 Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.
5 Excavations for wells, or trenches for utilities.

6 Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay controlled by other regulations, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support of, or significantly increase stresses in, soil on adjoining properties.

7 Exploratory excavations performed under the direction of a registered design professional.

Exemption from the permit requirements of this appendix shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.

The exemptions listed are for grading work that is relatively minor in nature (e.g., graves) or grading work that is normally regulated by other laws (e.g., utility trenching, mining, etc.).

## SECTION J104 Permit Application and Submittals

J104.1 Submittal requirements. In addition to the provisions of Section 105.3, the applicant shall state the estimated quantities of excavation and fill.

Section 105.3 lists the information that is required for a building permit application, which also applies for a grading permit. Additionally, the quantities of earthwork, commonly referred to as "cut" and "fill," must be furnished.

J104.2 Site plan requirements. In addition to the provisions of Section J107, a grading plan shall show the existing grade and finished grade in contour intervals of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work and show in detail that it complies with the requirements of this code. The plans shall show the existing grade on adjoining properties in sufficient detail to identify how grade changes will conform to the requirements of this code.

It is necessary for the permit applicant to furnish all applicable construction documents that are required in Section J107. Additionally, grading plans must provide sufficient grading information so that compliance with these requirements is verifiable.

J104.3 Geotechnical report. A geotechnical report prepared by a registered design professional shall be provided. The report shall contain at least the following:

1 The nature and distribution of existing soils.
2 Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures.

3 Soil design criteria for any structures or embankments required to accomplish the proposed grading.

===== Page 2108 =====
4 Where necessary, slope stability studies, and recommendations and conclusions regarding site geology.

Exception: A geotechnical report is not required where the building official determines that the nature of the work applied for is such that a report is not necessary.

This section requires the applicant to furnish a geotechnical report unless the building official determines that it is not necessary because the proposed grading is of relatively minor consequence. The intent is that the appropriate professional provides a report that assesses the hazards of a particular site and includes recommendations for accomplishing the proposed grading. Note that Section J101.1 states that the soils report would supersede the requirements of this chapter when a conflict exists, giving great weight to the professional's recommendations.

J104.4 Liquefaction study. For sites with mapped maximum considered earthquake spectral response accelerations at short periods ( \( S_{s} \) ) greater than 0.5g as determined by Section 1613, a study of the liquefaction potential of the site shall be provided and the recommendations incorporated in the plans.

Exception: A liquefaction study is not required where the building official determines from established local data that the liquefaction potential is low.

This section provides a guideline for the building official to determine if a liquefaction study is necessary. The exception provides the latitude to waive this requirement where it is evidenced that liquefaction is a low risk.

The need for a liquefaction study is triggered by the mapped spectral acceleration at short periods (see Section 1613.5.6) rather than seismic design category (see Section 1613.1), which is based on the nature of an occupancy in addition to the mapped spectral accelerations modified for the site soil classification. While seismic design category is an entirely appropriate criteria for such a requirement in connection with a building foundation under Chapter 18, the mapped spectral acceleration is more direct and appropriate for the application of this grading appendix since occupancy is most likely not applicable. While the mapped acceleration is used as the trigger for a study, it is ultimately the soil profile that determines the susceptibility to liquefaction.

## SECTION J105 Inspections

J105.1 General. Inspections shall be governed by Section 110 of this code.
A general reference is made to the inspection requirements in Section 109 of the code. The type and frequency of inspections specific to grading are not enumerated and are, therefore, left to the judgment of the building official.

J105.2 Special inspections. The special inspection requirements of Section 1705.6 shall apply to work performed under a grading permit where required by the building official.

The special inspection requirements of Section 1705.6 that are referred to in this section concern site preparation and fill placement.

## SECTION J106 Excavations

J106.1 Maximum slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use, and shall be not more than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50-percent slope) unless the owner or the owner's authorized agent furnishes a geotechnical report justifying a steeper slope.

Exceptions:

1. A cut surface shall be permitted to be at a slope of 1.5 units horizontal to one unit vertical (67-percent slope) provided that all of the following are met:

1.1. It is not intended to support structures or surcharges.

1.2. It is adequately protected against erosion.

1.3. It is no more than 2.4 mm in height.

1.4. It is approved by the building official.

1.5. Ground water is not encountered.

2. A cut surface in bedrock shall be permitted to be at a slope of one unit horizontal to one unit vertical (100-percent slope).

The code establishes a maximum two units horizontal to one unit vertical (50 percent) slope even though many professionals experienced in hillside urban development are likely to consider a one and one-half units horizontal to one unit vertical (67 percent) slope to be adequate for stability and erosion control. The two units horizontal to one unit vertical (50 percent) slope gradient is required to provide an extra margin of safety and easier maintenance capability, due to the fact that slope failures of cuts (as well as fills) with one and one-half units horizontal to one unit vertical (67 percent) slopes have been observed in the past. The cause of these failures was frequently traced to a lack of geotechnical inspection during grading or of proper maintenance after they were constructed. The building official may allow steeper cut slopes if they are justified by the geotechnical report. Exception 1 allows the steeper cut surface slope (discussed above) of one and one-half units horizontal to one unit vertical (67 percent) slope.

===== Page 2109 =====
percent) where the listed conditions are met, indicating a lower slope failure hazard. A steeper cut surface slope in bedrock is permitted because it is inherently more stable.

## SECTION J107 Fills

J107.1 General. Unless otherwise recommended in the geotechnical report, fills shall comply with the provisions of this section.

These provisions govern all fills. As is indicated in Section J101.1, the geotechnical report takes precedence in the event of conflicts with this chapter.

J107.2 Surface preparation. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, topsoil and other unsuitable materials, and scarifying the ground to provide a bond with the fill material.

Fill must only be placed onto sound bedrock or other competent material to minimize subsidence or settlement; therefore, the removal of all unsuitable materials is necessary.

J107.3 Benching. Where existing grade is at a slope steeper than one unit vertical in five units horizontal (20-percent slope) and the depth of the fill exceeds 1.5 m benching shall be provided in accordance with Figure J-1. A key shall be provided that is at least 3 m in width and 600 mm in depth.

☑ Benching requirements are illustrated in Figure J-1. The fill over an existing slope is potentially unstable unless constructed properly. Benching creates a series of (temporary) level steps on which the fill can be reliably placed and compacted. It is required for fills over 1.5 m deep where the existing slope is steeper than five units horizontal to one unit vertical (20 percent). The toe-of-fill bench is referred to as a key and the code specifies a minimum depth and width. The area of ground surface left at the planned toe-of-fill slope should be graded to drain away from the fill (see Section J108.3). This figure illustrates the intention of the benching requirements. It shows the key that is located at the toe-of-slope and the series of level benches that must be established in order to accomplish the proposed earthwork.

J107.4 Fill material. Fill material shall not include organic, frozen or other deleterious materials. No rock or similar irreducible material greater than 300 mm in any dimension shall be included in fills.

Organic materials should not be allowed in fills because they decompose over time, causing settlement or creating planes of weakness. Rocks of limited size are permitted in fills. Where doing so, they should be placed to ensure that the fill material can be placed in the voids around the rocks and compacted as required.
J107.5 Compaction. All fill material shall be compacted to 90 percent of maximum density as determined by ASTM D1557, Modified Proctor, in lifts not exceeding 300 mm in depth.

This section specifies a minimum soil density to be achieved uniformly throughout the fill as well as the test to be used. This sets minimum acceptable levels of fill quality to achieve performance that is consistent with the purpose of this chapter.

J107.6 Maximum slope. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Fill slopes steeper than one unit vertical in two units horizontal (50-percent slope) shall be justified by a geotechnical report or engineering data.

The maximum gradient of two units horizontal to one unit vertical (50 percent) for fill slopes minimizes the risk of slope failures (see commentary, Section J106.1). Compaction of fill can be accomplished more readily on slopes of two units horizontal to one unit vertical (50 percent) or less. Also, such slopes are more accessible, increasing the likelihood they will be maintained. Greater slopes are only permitted if substantiated by the geotechnical report or other engineering data.

## SECTION J108 Setbacks

J108.1 General. Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from the property lines in accordance with this section. Setback dimensions shall be measured perpendicular to the property line and shall be as shown in Figure J-2, unless substantiating data is submitted justifying reduced setbacks.

This section establishes minimum setbacks from property lines between the property being graded and adjacent properties. It is intended to apply at the exterior boundary of a tract and should not be applied, for instance, at the interior lot lines of a proposed development.

The figure specifies the setback requirements at the top and bottom of graded slopes.

J108.2 Top of slope. The setback at the top of a cut slope shall be not less than that shown in Figure J-2, or than is required to accommodate any required interceptor drains, whichever is greater.

The intention of the top-of-slope setback is to protect the adjacent property. The setback allows for some soil erosion without losing lateral support of the adjacent property, thus protecting structures on that property. It also provides some space for an interceptor drain if needed (see Section J109.3). The top-of-slope setback requirements are illustrated in Figure J-2.

J108.3 Slope protection. Where required to protect adjacent properties at the toe of a slope from adverse effects of the grading, additional protection, approved by the building official, shall be included.

===== Page 2110 =====
Such protection may include but shall not be limited to:

1 Setbacks greater than those required by Figure J-2.

2 Provisions for retaining walls or similar construction.

3 Erosion protection of the fill slopes.

4 Provision for the control of surface waters.

The minimum toe-of-fill setback from the adjacent property line is specified in Figure J-2. Additional clearance must be provided as necessary, for example, to allow for the construction of retaining walls. For example, it may also be necessary to provide an area to collect slope runoff along the toe of slope and to construct a drain if needed.

## SECTION J109 Drainage and Terracing

J109.1 General. Unless otherwise recommended by a registered design professional, drainage facilities and terracing shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this section.

Exception: Drainage facilities and terracing need not be provided where the ground slope is not steeper than one unit vertical in three units horizontal (33-percent slope).

This section establishes minimum requirements for drainage that are largely based on past experience. They are minimum standards and the design professional should use them as such, evaluating each site based on its own merits. Consideration also should be given to long-term performance in addition to the likelihood of inadequate maintenance of slopes in residential developments. Controlling drainage onto and off the proposed site is one of the most important considerations in grading design, since even a well-compacted fill or graded cut slope can be compromised by inadequate drainage.

J109.2 Terraces. Terraces at least 1.8 m in width shall be established at not more than 9.1 m vertical intervals on all cut or fill slopes to control surface drainage and debris. Suitable access shall be provided to allow for cleaning and maintenance.

Where more than two terraces are required, one terrace, located at approximately mid-height, shall be at least 3.65 m in width.

Swales or ditches shall be provided on terraces. They shall have a minimum gradient of one unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (5-percent slope) and shall be paved with concrete not less than 75 mm in thickness, or with other materials suitable to the application. They shall have a depth not less than 300 mm and a width not less than 1.5 m.

A single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary area exceeding  \( 1250 \, m^{2} \)  (projected) without discharging into a down drain.
* Terraces are required where a graded slope has a height over 9.1 m. They provide level surfaces along the graded slope to allow access for slope maintenance and accommodate drainage.

The terrace ditch gradient of 5 percent helps make the drain more self-cleansing and recognizes a typical lack of maintenance, since most of the hillside dwellers will not climb up or down the slope to keep a drain clear of debris. Swales serving larger drainage areas must discharge into a down drain, which is defined in Section J102.1.

J109.3 Interceptor drains. Interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of cut slopes receiving drainage from a tributary width greater than 12.2 m, measured horizontally. They shall have a minimum depth of 300 mm and a minimum width of 900 mm. The slope shall be approved by the building official, but shall be not less than one unit vertical in 50 units horizontal (2-percent slope). The drain shall be paved with concrete not less than 75 mm in thickness, or by other materials suitable to the application. Discharge from the drain shall be accomplished in a manner to prevent erosion and shall be approved by the building official.

* Interceptor drains are important in protecting the face of cut slopes from excessive erosion and are, therefore, required under certain conditions. The discharge of an interceptor drain must not contribute to erosion and requires the building official's approval.

J109.4 Drainage across property lines. Drainage across property lines shall not exceed that which existed prior to grading. Excess or concentrated drainage shall be contained on site or directed to an approved drainage facility. Erosion of the ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of non-errosive down drains or other devices.

* This section protects adjacent properties from exposure to added runoff as a result of the grading as well as any concentrated runoff created by the grading. It requires collection of any excess or concentrated drainage and allows it to be held on site or discharged by approved methods.

## SECTION J110 Erosion Control

J110.1 General. The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion. This control shall be permitted to consist of effective planting.

Exception: Erosion control measures need not be provided on cut slopes not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the materials.

===== Page 2111 =====
Erosion control for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for final inspection.

Adequate provisions should be made to prevent surface water from damaging the face of a graded slope. Effective planting is a lasting method of minimizing erosion. Other measures may include berms, interceptor drains and terrace drains.

J110.2 Other devices. Where necessary, check dams, cribbing, riprap or other devices or methods shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety.

Adequate provisions should be made to prevent surface water from damaging the face of a graded slope. Effective planting is a lasting method of minimizing erosion. Other measures may include berms, interceptor drains and terrace drains.

## SECTION J111 Referenced Standards

These standards are listed here for guidance; however, for enforcement, they shall be adopted and/or approved by the appropriate governmental authority (SASO or SBCNC) as per their mandates, before being considered part of this code.

ASTM D1557-12. Test Method for Laboratory Compaction Characteristics of Soil Using Modified Effort  \( [2,700\mathrm{kN}\cdot\mathrm{m}/\mathrm{m}^{3}] \) . (J107.5)

This section lists the standards referenced by this appendix chapter. Since appendices are not considered part of the code unless specifically referred to in the adopting ordinance, the standards that are referenced in this chapter are listed here rather than in Chapter 35.

===== Page 2112 =====
## Bibliography

The following resource materials were used in the preparation of the commentary for this appendix chapter of the code:

1 ASTM D1557-e01, Test Method for Laboratory Compaction Characteristics of Soil Using Modified Effort (56,000ft-lb/ft2). West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2001.

2 Scullin, C. Michael. Excavation and Grading Code Administration, Inspection and Enforcement. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1983.

3 UBC-97, Uniform Building Code. Whittier, CA: International Conference of Building Officials, 1997.

===== Page 2113 =====
## FIGURES OF APPENDIX J

FIGURE J-1
BENCHING DETAILS

FIGURE J-2
DRAINAGE DIMENSIONS

===== Page 2114 =====
This page left intentionally blank

===== Page 2115 =====
## APPENDIX K—ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

===== Page 2116 =====
## APPENDIX L—EARTHQUAKE RECORDING INSTRUMENTATION

===== Page 2117 =====
## APPENDIX M—TSUNAMI-GENERATED FLOOD HAZARD

===== Page 2118 =====
# APPENDIX N—REPLICABLE BUILDINGS

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

## ☑ GENERAL

Throughout the country, buildings that are made from “cookie cutter” plans are utilized by large corporations, particularly retailers and warehousing operations. Examples are “big box” stores and other retail stores that utilize the same floor plan, or perhaps a limited number of floor plans, throughout the country. This is done to save money on design fees from architects and engineers. In like manner, at the plan review and permit stages, time and money can also be saved.

The Replicable Building Review concept has the potential to avail additional expertise to the jurisdiction through an expert review process similar to the present use of evaluation reports that ensure code compliance of a particular product. Replicable building design reviews, like evaluation reports, have the potential to produce more thorough and uniform results. Benefits derived from this appendix include:

• Enhanced public safety through a more uniform review process

• Conservation of local resources through the elimination of repetitive reviews of transportable plans

• Reduced time between permit submittal and construction mobilization

## PURPOSE

This appendix is intended to help the government as well as owners, architects, builders and engineers—by streamlining the construction document review required for replicable buildings, thus eliminating repetitive code compliance reviews. A global review of replicable documents paired with a local review of unique requirements could be more cost effective and bring greater consistency in the application of the law.

## SECTION N101 ADMINISTRATION

N101.1 Purpose. The purpose of this appendix is to provide a format and direction regarding the implementation of a replicable building program.

See the General and Purpose commentaries at the beginning of this appendix.

N101.2 Objectives. Such programs allow a jurisdiction to recover from a natural disaster faster and allow for consistent application of the codes for replicable building projects. It will result in faster turnaround for the end user, and a quicker turnaround through the plan review process.

This section simply states some specific scenarios where use of replicable buildings is advantageous. This section is not intended to limit the application of replicable buildings to these scenarios.

## SECTION N102 DEFINITIONS

N102.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this appendix, have the meanings shown herein.

REPLICABLE BUILDING. A building or structure utilizing a replicable design.

REPLICABLE DESIGN. A prototypical design developed for application in multiple locations with minimal variation or modification.

The meanings ascribed to the defined terms are specific to this appendix.

## SECTION N103 REPLICABLE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS

N103.1.1 Prototypical construction documents. A replicable design shall establish prototypical construction documents for application at multiple locations. The construction documents shall include details appropriate to each wind region, seismic design category, and climate zone for locations in which the replicable design is intended for application.

Application of replicable design shall not vary with regard to the following, except for allowable variations in accordance with Section N106.

1 Use and occupancy classification.

2 Building heights and area limitations.

3 Type of construction classification.

4 Fire-resistance ratings.

5 Interior finishes.

6 Fire protection system.

7 Means of egress.

8 Accessibility.

9 Structural design criteria.

10 Energy efficiency.

11 Type of mechanical and electrical systems.

12 Type of plumbing system and number of fixtures.

There are key ingredients that must be included in the design of a replicable building to make it truly replicable. These key ingredients are listed in this section.

===== Page 2119 =====
## SECTION N104 REPLICABLE DESIGN
SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

N104.1 General. A summary description of the replicable design and related construction documents shall be submitted to an approved agency. Where approval is requested for elements of the replicable design that is not within the scope of SBC 201, the construction documents shall specifically designate the codes for which review is sought. Construction documents shall be signed, sealed and dated by a registered design professional.

The required construction documents parallel what is required in Chapter 1 for any building. As can be seen in Sections N104.1.1, N104.1.2, and N104.1.3, approval can be sought in parts: Architectural plans and specifications, structural plans and specifications, and energy conservation plans and specifications. This essentially allows for replicable plans to be submitted for these different disciplines only.

It should be noted that the requirement for signature by a registered design professional is a requirement for the specific building.

N104.1.1 Architectural plans and specifications. Where approval of the architectural requirements of the replicable design is sought, the submittal documents shall include architectural plans and specifications as follows:

1 Description of uses and the proposed occupancy groups for all portions of the building.

2 Proposed type of construction of the building.

3 Fully dimensioned drawings to determine building areas and height.

4 Adequate details and dimensions to evaluate means of egress, including occupant loads for each floor, exit arrangement and sizes, corridors, doors and stairs.

5 Exit signs and means of egress lighting, including power supply.

6 Accessibility scoping provisions.

7 Description and details of proposed special occupancies such as a covered mall, high-rise, mezzanine, atrium and public garage.

8 Adequate details to evaluate fire-resistance-rated construction requirements, including data substantiating required ratings.

9 Details for plastics, insulation and safety glazing installation.

10 Details of required fire protection systems.

11 Material specifications demonstrating fire-resistance criteria.

See the commentary to Section N104.1.
N104.1.2 Structural plans, specifications and engineering details. Where approval of the structural requirements of the replicable design is sought, the submittal documents shall include details for each wind region, seismic design category and climate zone for which approval is sought; and shall include the following:

1 Signed and sealed structural design calculations that support the member sizes on the drawings.

2 Design load criteria, including: live loads, wind loads, earthquake design date, and other special loads

3 Details of foundations and superstructure.

4 Provisions for special inspections.

See the commentary to Section N104.1.

N104.1.3 Energy conservation details. Where approval of the energy conservation requirements of the replicable design is sought, the submittal documents shall include details for each climate zone for which approval is sought; and shall include the following:

1 Climate zones for which approval is sought.

2 Building envelope details.

3 Building mechanical system details.

4 Details of electrical power and lighting systems.

5 Provisions for system commissioning.

See the commentary to Section N104.1.

## SECTION N105 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF REPLICABLE DESIGN

N105.1 General. Proposed replicable designs shall be reviewed by an approved agency. The review shall be applicable only to the replicable design features submitted in accordance with Section N104. The review shall determine compliance with this code and additional codes specified in Section N104.1.

This section and Section N106 and Section N107 lead to a building permit for replicable buildings. The replicable areas are all initially reviewed by an approved agency. An approved agency should be an independent, third-party agency that is competent in the technical area in question.

N105.2 Documentation. The results of the review shall be documented indicating compliance with the code requirements.

Documentation of the review is necessary to ensure that all questions about code compliance have been addressed, and any deficiencies noted and corrected.

N105.3 Deficiencies. Where the review of the submitted construction documents identifies elements where the design is deficient and will not comply with the applicable code requirements, the

===== Page 2120 =====
approved agency shall notify the proponent of the replicable design, in writing, of the specific areas of noncompliance and request correction.

A written notification is required in order to provide a documentation trail if there is any challenge later to code compliance.

N105.4 Approval. Where the review of the submitted construction documents determines that the design is in compliance with the codes designated in Section N104.1, and where deficiencies identified in Section N105.3 have been corrected the approved agency shall issue a summary report of Approved Replicable Design. The summary report shall include any limitations on the approved replicable design including, but not limited to climate zones, wind regions and seismic design categories.

A summary report of compliance allows for the building official to review the replicable design and determine that a comprehensive review for code compliance has been completed.

## SECTION N106 SITE-SPECIFIC
APPLICATION OF APPROVED
REPLICABLE DESIGN

N106.1 General. Where site-specific application of a replicable design that has been approved under the provisions of Section N105 is sought, the construction documents submitted to the building official shall comply with this section.

Replicable design construction document requirements parallel the requirements for construction documents for any construction. The difference here is that the documents need to distinguish the portion that is part of the replicable design and other portions that are site specific.

N106.2 Submittal documents. A summary description of the replicable design and related construction document shall be submitted. Construction documents shall be signed, sealed and dated by the registered design professional. A statement, signed, sealed and dated by the registered design professional, that the replicable design submitted for local review is the same as the replicable design reviewed by the approved agency, shall be submitted.

See the commentary to Section N106.1.

N106.2.1 Architectural plans and specifications. Architectural plans and

specifications shall include the following:

1 Construction documents for variations from

the replicable design.

2 Construction for portions that are not part of

the replicable design.

3 Documents for local requirements as identified by the building official.

4 Construction documents detailing the foundation system.

See the commentary to Section N106.1.

## SECTION N107 SITE-SPECIFIC REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF REPLICABLE DESIGN

N107.1 General. Proposed site-specific application of replicable design shall be submitted to the building official in accordance with the provisions of 0 and Appendix N.

As with any building, the approval must be based on compliance with code for the specific site at which the building is located.

N107.2 Site-specific review and approval of replicable design. The building official shall verify that the replicable design submitted for site-specific application is the same as the approved replicable design reviewed by the approved agency. In addition, the building official shall review the following for code compliance.

1 Construction documents for variations from the replicable design.

2 Construction for portions of the building that are not part of the replicable design.

3 Documents for local requirements as identified by the building official.

See the commentary to Section N107.1.

===== Page 2121 =====
# APPENDIX O PERFORMANCE-BASED APPLICATION

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance.

## General Comments

The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically referenced in the adopting ordinance, as stated in Section 101.2.1.

The regulations contained in this appendix address the growing use of performance-based design approaches and the need to provide a stronger framework for the approvals process. The ICCPC contains many of these concepts within its administrative Chapter 1; however, many designs that are designed through a performance-based or alternative process are working directly through the building code. This appendix addresses the key process components that should be addressed during such design reviews and approvals including qualifications, proper construction document preparation, the review process, construction phase and the long-term use of such buildings. This includes what should be included in the design documentation and how compliance is verified.

## Purpose

The purpose of this appendix is to provide a resource and possibly an adopted appendix that can provide a stronger framework for the review and approval of performance-based designs, commonly termed “alternative designs,” beyond simple demonstration of equivalency. This includes what documentation should be provided and how compliance is properly verified. Concepts such as the use of peer review are introduced as a tool in this process.

## SECTION O101 GENERAL

O101.1 Introduction. The following administrative provisions are excerpted from the ICC Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities and can be used in conjunction with the Alternate Methods provisions in Chapter 1, or for a review of submittals requiring a rational analysis or performance-based design. These provisions provide an established framework for the building official in terms of the design expertise needed, the necessary submittals, a review framework and related items.

This appendix is intended to provide key aspects of the International Code Council Performance Code for Buildings and Facilities (ICCPC) from an administrative perspective. The ICCPC is often not adopted but provides some valuable tools that could be of assistance to building and fire officials when presented with performance-based designs. It should be clarified that most performance-based designs are akin to alternative designs and often are not fully performance based. In other words, it is usually only a small aspect of a building that is designed in such a way that it deviates from the prescriptive SBC 201. As this section states, this appendix is focused on qualifications, construction document needs and concepts for proper review of such designs. This appendix could also supplement the information found in Section 104.11.

O101.2 Qualifications. Registered design professionals shall possess the knowledge, skills and abilities necessary to demonstrate compliance with this code.

The qualifications of registered design professionals their knowledge of design, analysis, research, computation, documentation and professional standards in their respective areas of expertise—are prerequisites to a successful application of performance-based design provisions. Qualifications, to a certain extent, are regulated by professional registration laws within the state or jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed.

In addition to the registration requirements that may exist within the jurisdiction, the building official may require a formal declaration of education, training and experience of all design team members to ensure that sufficient expertise has been retained in all technical subject areas of the performance-based design. The performance-based solution is a systems approach, and all components must be addressed with a proper level of sophistication that can span many design disciplines.

Registered design professionals and other members of the design team (such as architects; engineers; interior, theater and kitchen designers; fire modelers; and computer support staff) have a responsibility to gain technical skills and performance-based design skills through professional or university programs before embarking on a design project using performance-based design techniques. The intent is that the design team must consist

===== Page 2122 =====
of sufficiently qualified individuals to carry out the responsibilities necessary to design the proposed project.

The minimum qualifications and skills of the design professional will vary significantly based on the type of project and the degree of analysis that the project requires. Performance-based designs require more analysis than the same design undertaken using a prescriptive code or standard. The main difference is that the decision-making process involves multiple objectives to demonstrate compliance with performance provisions and acceptable methods. It follows, then, that increased project documentation of these many decisions and corresponding solutions will be necessary. Therefore, the qualifications and skill levels for design professionals may vary as a function of the size and complexity of the project design. It is incumbent upon the design professional to become competent in any areas of practice where new skills are required before undertaking a project based on performance design techniques.

The increased qualifications and required skills are particularly important for those designers that utilize modeling techniques. Design-team leadership skills also need increased attention and enhancement to ensure all aspects of the design are coordinated and meet the intent of the code. This will require extensive coordination skills in the leader to enable team members to produce a system design with compatible components. As noted previously, many projects will be only partly based on performance design; many of the design features will remain prescriptive and must interface with the performance-design components.

Large, complex projects using performance approaches would most likely require highly qualified and skilled engineers in the structural, electrical, fire and mechanical disciplines that are necessary to undertake a major, complex building design.

O101.3 Construction document preparation. Construction documents required by this code shall be prepared in adequate detail and submitted for review and approval in accordance with Section 107.

Whether a project is based on the prescriptive building code or is a performance-based design, proper construction documentation is necessary. There is no reason to treat performance designs differently in that respect as ultimately the design needs to be translated into documents that will describe clearly how a building is to be constructed.
O101.3.1 Review. Construction documents submitted in accordance with this code shall be reviewed for code compliance with the appropriate code provisions in accordance with Section 107.

The review process is necessary to verify that the construction documents meet the requirements of the code. Most performance-based designs depend primarily on the prescriptive code for much of the building design, as only certain aspects of the building design are performance-based. Therefore, much of the review will be based on the building code. It is important that construction documents are clear as to where each aspect of the building design originates such that it is clear whether it is linked to a prescriptive code or performance-based solution. The prescriptive building code may require a different fire-resistance rating, for example, than the performance-based design requires. These differences need to be understood during the construction document review.

O101.4 Construction. Construction shall comply with the approved construction documents submitted in accordance with this code, and shall be verified and approved to demonstrate compliance with this code.

Regardless of what the design was based on, construction must be based on the approved construction documents. Any variations must be accounted for and verified to ensure that the change does not affect the performance of the building adversely. This may require a special designed using performance-based methods.

O101.4.1 Facility operating policies and procedures. Policies, operations, training and procedures shall comply with approved documents submitted in accordance with this code, and shall be verified and approved to demonstrate compliance with this code.

Some performance-based designs come with unique requirements that must be maintained, such as restrictions on occupant load or contents that may otherwise would not be regulated by the prescriptive building code. However, designs should be robust enough to still perform as intended with minor modifications. These documents are key to the long-term successful life of a building and must be reviewed and approved.

O101.4.2 Maintenance. Maintenance of the performance-based design shall be ensured throughout the life of the building or portion thereof.

As noted in Section O101.4.2, where there are unique characteristics of a building that need to be maintained to continue to function as

===== Page 2123 =====
intended, those characteristics must be properly maintained. One could argue this is true of many aspects of the prescriptive code requirements, such as fire barriers or automatic sprinkler systems. Maintenance is key in all buildings regardless of how they are designed. Most systems and features of the building will still be typical features and systems, but they may be used in slightly different applications and need to be maintained as approved. For example, the fire protection system may have a different testing schedule than typically prescribed.

Once a building or facility is constructed and approved, the owner is responsible for maintaining it in accordance with the approved operations and maintenance manual. Critical areas determined by the design professional may require inspection, testing or service at predetermined intervals to ensure continued compliance for the life of the building. Like other areas of noncompliance, the performance-based design aspect of the building must be maintained.

The maintenance responsibilities of an owner of a performance-based design facility can require a higher level of accountability than if the facility were built only to prescriptive construction codes. It is intended that the building officials who enforce the building, residential, electrical, fire, mechanical and plumbing codes be part of the review process for buildings and facilities approved under this code and for enforcement of future maintenance provisions. The building officials who enforce maintenance and fire code provisions must be adequately prepared for inspection of performance-based design buildings and facilities in accordance with the operations and maintenance manual.

This section of the appendix does not mandate a particular approach, but options include a conditional certificate of occupancy or, where the features are extremely critical, a deed restriction to maintain an active certificate of occupancy. Failure to comply with these conditions or a deed restriction could result in revocation or nonrenewal of the certificate of occupancy.

O101.4.3 Changes. The owner or the owner's authorized agent shall be responsible to ensure that any change to the facility, process, or system does not increase the hazard level beyond that originally designed without approval and that changes shall be documented in accordance with the code.

It is the responsibility of the owner to properly address any changes that could potentially exceed the conditions approved in the original design. Where a building, structure or facility is proposed to be remodeled, to be renovated or to undergo a significant change of use, a qualified design professional should evaluate the existing construction documents for the proposed change and submit a written report of the findings and recommendations. The building official then should evaluate the written report, intended design, or change of use to determine if the proposal adversely impacts the existing building or facility and to determine compliance with this code based on prior approved performance design documents. Based on the findings, written comments should be provided to the design professional indicating either approval of the change or the requirements for correcting any adverse findings. Once the report is approved in concept, the design professional can proceed with the design or initiate the change of use, which may require a new or updated certificate of occupancy.

O101.5 Documentation. The registered design professional shall prepare appropriate documentation for the project, clearly detailing the approach and rationale for the design submittal, the construction and the future use of the building, facility or process.

This section is intended to clarify the full scope of documentation required for a project, which might vary significantly based on the building official's discretion and the complexity of the project. Performance-based designs require a much higher level of documentation since they do not simply follow prescriptive requirements. However, often much of the overall design is still based on the prescriptive building code.

Complete documentation that provides a clear record of objectives and decisions made to provide a safe building, including associated use and maintenance responsibilities, can be a substantial benefit to the building official's staff and the public after completion of a project.

This documentation must also contain any conditions unique to this building that would require special maintenance or certain procedures that may not be anticipated with a typical building based on a purely prescriptive approach. This can be done by the conditional certificate of occupancy that highlights certain "bounding conditions" to provide public notice to future buyers, lenders or any other persons who may be reviewing legal conditions via a due diligence review.

O101.5.1 Reports and manuals. The design report shall document the steps taken in the design analysis, clearly identifying the criteria, parameters, inputs, assumptions, sensitivities and limitations involved in the analysis. The design report shall clearly identify bounding conditions, assumptions

===== Page 2124 =====
and sensitivities that clarify the expected uses and limitations of the performance analysis. This report shall verify that the design approach is in compliance with the applicable codes and acceptable methods and shall be submitted for concurrence by the building official prior to the construction documents being completed. The report shall document the design features to be incorporated based on the analysis.

The design report shall address the following:

1 Project scope.

2 Goals and objectives.

3 Performance criteria.

4 Hazard scenarios.

5 Design fire loads and hazards.

6 Final design.

7 Evaluation.

8 Bounding conditions and critical design assumptions.

9 Critical design features.

10 System design and operational requirements.

11 Operational and maintenance requirements.

12 Commissioning testing requirements and acceptance criteria.

13 Frequency of certificate renewal.

14 Supporting documents and references.

15 Preliminary site and floor plans.

The design report documents: project scope, goals and objectives; steps taken for analytical analyses with identification of performance criteria, parameter input assumptions and limitations; magnitude of design loads; computer model data and scenarios for evaluating acceptance ranges; final design; evaluation; criteria design assumptions with bounding conditions, critical design features and final design bounding conditions; commissioning testing requirements with acceptance criteria; and supporting documents and references. The registered design professional in responsible charge should provide copies of supporting documents and references necessary for a professional review to be completed. Design guidelines, handbooks and other applicable authoritative documents prepared by professional associations may expand or further clarify applications of the items listed.

O101.5.2 Design submittal. Applicable construction documents shall be submitted to the building official for review. The documents shall be submitted in accordance with the jurisdiction's procedures and in sufficient detail to obtain appropriate permits.

The design professional(s) must coordinate all design documentation for compatibility and completeness to be submitted to the building official. Design documents must clearly indicate the areas where performance and prescriptive codes apply, so that it is clear to the reviewer which prescriptive code provisions are applicable.

Documents should be submitted in accordance with the procedures of the jurisdiction and in sufficient detail to obtain permits for the project. Reports and preliminary documents required by the building official, such as concept reports, design reports and operations and maintenance manuals, may be required earlier than full design document submittal to obtain permits so that conceptual or phase reviews can be made.

O101.6 Review. Construction documents submitted in accordance with this code shall be reviewed for code compliance with the appropriate code provisions.

Before approving and issuing a permit, the building official or other designated individuals are responsible to review or ensure that construction documents meet the requirements of the performance code as well as the prescriptive code provisions that are being utilized as part of the design. Although performance-based designs will be submitted a small percentage of the time, they will likely complicate the plan review process. This depends on the scope of the design that is based on performance-based design methodologies. There will be many designs that are primarily based on the prescriptive codes but incorporate minor performance-based elements.

Performance-based design typically cannot depend solely upon designs being signed off on by a registered design professional without additional review, Registration and a license to practice engineering do not necessarily constitute acceptable qualifications to undertake a performance-based design or remove the need for review by the building official or a third-party reviewer.

The building official can still undertake review in a traditional manner for most projects. Where performance-based elements are incorporated it is particularly important that the building official evaluate the skills of the department before undertaking such a review. Understanding review limitations and addressing these limitations ahead of time will help to ensure a successful and thorough review. This understanding of limitations includes evaluating the educational qualifications and experience needed to review performance-based designs and analyses. The building official may consider one or more of the following options to

===== Page 2125 =====
develop a plan for ensuring qualified plan review:

Determine if the staff has sufficient education, engineering or architectural registrations, and levels of continuing education needed to perform the tasks.

Initiate a program to upgrade plan reviewers' educational and professional qualifications.

Acquire contract review services via a consultant plan reviewer with applicable qualifications.

Utilize a peer review process that will provide individuals or a team meeting an appropriate level of qualifications, standards of ethics and accountability. Guidelines for Peer Review in the Fire Protection Design Process is a resource for undertaking peer review that can assist with this process.

When the building official accepts a consultant as a contract reviewer in lieu of their own staff's review of construction documents, documentation must be provided for the building official's acceptance indicating that the performance and prescriptive code provisions have been met. This document should become part of the official records for the project and the basis of approving the design documents and issuing permits.

After the design documents, supporting documents and reports are verified as meeting this code and other applicable codes, permits should be issued in accordance with building official procedures.

O101.6.1 Peer review. The owner or the owner's authorized agent shall be responsible for retaining and furnishing the services of a registered design professional or recognized expert, who will perform as a peer reviewer, where required and approved by the building official.

This section is simply denoting that if a peer review is necessary it is the responsibility of the owner to coordinate and pay for such process. The peer reviewer must be approved by the building official. It is possible in some jurisdictions they may have a preferred list of approved peer reviewers to simplify and facilitate this process.

O101.6.2 Costs. The costs of special services, including contract review, where required by the building official, shall be borne by the owner or the owner's authorized agent.

Costs for review of design documents and for inspections should be the burden of the owner. Since costs for services are expected to exceed the fees collected for typical plan review and inspection services, the building official should amend the code to include cost recovery for services rendered on all projects using performance approaches.

O101.7 Permits. Prior to the start of construction, appropriate permits shall be obtained in accordance with the jurisdiction's procedures and applicable codes.

This section ensures that, regardless of the type of project, all proper permits are obtained before construction begins.

O101.8 Verification of compliance. Upon completion of the project, documentation shall be prepared that verifies performance and prescriptive code provisions have been met. Where required by the building official, the registered design professional shall file a report that verifies bounding conditions are met.

☑ Verifying that a building as constructed complies with the design that was approved is critical. This verification comes in the form of proper documentation.

This section is intended to clarify the full scope of documentation required for a project, which might vary significantly based on the building official's discretion and the complexity of the project. Performance-based designs require a much higher level of documentation. Complete documentation that provides a clear record of objectives and decisions made to provide a safe building, including associated use and maintenance responsibilities, can be a substantial benefit to the building official's staff and the public after completion of a project. In some cases, performance-based designs may have specific "bounding conditions," such as a limit on types of events or combustible material, that will require documentation both when the building is first occupied and for the life of the building.

O101.9 Extent of documentation. Approved construction documents, the operations and maintenance manual, inspection and testing records, and certificates of occupancy with conditions shall be included in the project documentation of the building official's records.

Documents from the initial approved design through operation and maintenance manuals must be included in the official record to foster ongoing compliance. Without this documentation, the possibilities that the unique aspects of the design would be lost and the building not properly operated or maintained increase. The documentation required would need to include any "bounding conditions."

O101.10 Analysis of change. The registered design professional shall evaluate the existing building, facilities, premises, processes, and contents, and the applicable documentation of the proposed change as it affects portions of the

===== Page 2126 =====
building, facility, premises, processes and contents that were previously designed for compliance under a performance-based code. Prior to any change that was not documented in a previously approved design, the registered design professional shall examine the applicable design documents, bounding conditions, operation and maintenance manuals, and deed restrictions.

As discussed in Section O101.4.3, it is critical that a registered design professional address any changes to a building that was designed and constructed based on a performance-based design. See the commentary to Section O101.4.3.

===== Page 2127 =====
## Bibliography

The following resource material was used in the preparation of the commentary for this appendix of the code.

Guidelines for Peer Review in the Fire Protection Design Process. Gaithersburg, MD: Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE), 2020