===== Page 1792 =====
# CHAPTER 25—GYPSUM BOARD, GYPSUM PANEL PRODUCTS AND PLASTER

## General Comments

Chapter 25 contains the provisions and referenced standards that regulate the design, construction and quality of gypsum board and plaster. These represent the most common interior and exterior finish materials in the building industry, and the provisions dealing with them are contained within this single chapter. This chapter deals primarily with quality-control-related issues with regard to material specifications and installation requirements. This chapter addresses weather ratings and provides cross references to the requirements for shear walls constructed of either wood stud or light-gage steel stud framing. In addition, provisions for constructing horizontal gypsum board ceiling diaphragms are included.

Where materials described in this chapter are used or required for fire-resistant construction, the code requires that they also comply with the provisions of Chapter 7.

Section 2501 addresses the scope of this chapter.

Section 2502 states performance requirements for gypsum board and plaster materials.

Section 2503 explains the responsibility of the contractor to have work inspected by the building official.

Section 2504 defines the construction and application requirements for gypsum board and plaster for use on walls and ceilings.

Section 2505 allows for the use of lightweight shear walls that are sheathed with gypsum board or lath and plaster.

Section 2506 outlines the quality standards for gypsum board and related materials and accessories.

Section 2507 outlines the quality standards for lath, plaster and related materials and accessories.

Section 2508 includes material and construction standards for the use of gypsum board and gypsum plaster materials with reference to fire-resistance-rated assemblies. It also provides requirements for constructing gypsum board ceiling diaphragms using wood joists.

Section 2509 establishes requirements for the use of gypsum board in wet areas.
Section 2510 describes material standards and construction requirements for cement plaster and related accessories.

Section 2511 defines material standards, construction requirements and limitations for plaster and related accessories when applied to an interior surface.

Section 2512 defines material standards, construction requirements and limitations for plaster and related accessories when applied to exterior and weather-exposed surfaces.

Section 2513 addresses the use of applied aggregate finishes to interior and exterior plaster.

Section 2514 addresses reinforced gypsum concrete.

Gypsum board and plaster products represent a line of building products that are, for the most part, manufactured under the control of industry standards. The building official or inspector only needs to verify that the appropriate product has been used and properly installed for the intended use and location. Several key points of installation have been addressed in this chapter where these practices have been known to create problems or where not addressed by other gypsum or plaster product standards.

## Purpose

Chapter 25 provides the minimum design requirements through referenced and industry standards for the use of gypsum board, gypsum plaster and cement plaster materials in construction.

## SECTION 2501 GENERAL

2501.1 Scope. Provisions of this chapter shall govern the materials, design, construction and quality of gypsum board, gypsum panel products, lath, gypsum plaster, cement plaster and reinforced gypsum concrete.

Chapter 25 includes the requirements that govern the materials, design, construction, quality and application for interior and exterior gypsum board, gypsum panel products, plaster products and reinforced gypsum concrete. Although these products are most commonly used as interior or exterior finished wall and ceiling coverings, proper design and application are necessary to provide weather resistance and required fire protection for structural and nonstructural building components, and meet structural requirements.

===== Page 1793 =====
for gypsum board and plaster products and assemblies.

Provisions for the quality, construction and labeling of all gypsum panel products and plaster materials used in the construction of wall and ceiling coverings are included in this chapter. Methods of fastening and, in the case of plaster, the permitted materials for lath, plaster and aggregate in all buildings and structures are also addressed. In general, all gypsum board and plaster materials are required to conform to the applicable standards as referenced in this chapter.

2501.2 Other materials. Other approved wall or ceiling coverings shall be permitted to be installed in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer and the conditions of approval.

Gypsum board and plaster are currently the primary building materials being used for wall and ceiling covering, but there are many other materials in use today for covering interior and exterior walls, ceilings and soffits. This chapter makes no attempt to address the use of any other building materials, such as wood, concrete, concrete masonry, brick, metal or vinyl, nor is it intended to limit the use of these or any other materials for similar installations. The material standards and construction regulations for other approved building materials are addressed elsewhere in the code.

## SECTION 2502 PERFORMANCE

2502.1 General. Lathing, plastering and gypsum board and gypsum panel product construction shall be done in the manner and with the materials specified in this chapter and, when required for fire protection, shall also comply with the provisions of Chapter 7.

The extensive use of gypsum panel products and plaster throughout the construction industry for many years has led to the development of a comprehensive index of tested and proven performance standards. This chapter is directed at identifying the performance standards required to ensure a quality of construction that will provide a safe, habitable environment for the life of the building or structure. The standards contained and referenced in this chapter and elsewhere in the code establish the minimum performance standards and requirements for all methods and materials contained in this chapter.

Gypsum plaster, cement plaster and gypsum panel products and materials have inherent fire-resistant qualities that provide outstanding passive fire protection of building components and assemblies. When these materials are used in the construction of fire-resistant assemblies, the details of construction are to comply with the requirements established by the official fire test reports conducted by recognized testing laboratories in accordance with Chapter 7 and the referenced standards listed in Chapter 35.

## SECTION 2503 INSPECTION

2503.1 General. Lath, gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall be inspected in accordance with Section 110.3.6.

This section establishes guidelines and requirements for the inspection of all components of gypsum board, gypsum panel products, plaster products, assemblies and installations as outlined in the code and as required or requested by the building official. The building official is allowed to inspect the installation of all plaster lathing system components prior to being concealed from view by the application of a plaster base coat or finished coats. It is essential not only that the lath be the proper type for the plaster system being used, but also that the components of the system are installed properly.

Plaster wall and ceiling assemblies as well as gypsum board wall and ceiling assemblies are quite often, by design, part of a building's passive fire protection system, as they provide not only the fire-resistant construction necessary for the proper separation of defined areas within a structure, but also fire-protected components of the structure. The building official is to be given the opportunity by the permit holder to verify that the assemblies will serve the purpose for which they are designed. This can only be done by allowing the building official to visually inspect the components of the various systems while they are still accessible.

## SECTION 2504 VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLIES

2504.1 Scope. The following requirements shall be met where construction involves gypsum board, gypsum panel products or lath and plaster in vertical and horizontal assemblies.

Section 2504 and the referenced standards, structural limitations and requirements addressed elsewhere define the minimum requirements for the structural members supporting the weight of gypsum board, gypsum panel products and plaster where used in the construction of walls and ceilings. Vertical assemblies (walls and partitions) must be designed in accordance with the engineering chapters of the code for proper structural support of gypsum board or plaster wall covering. If the wall or partition construction and assembly are not designed to resist the loads prescribed in the code, the wall

===== Page 1794 =====
covering materials will perform inadequately. The general design provisions of Chapter 16 and the deflection limitations are particularly important in this regard.

The code requirements for the design and framing of horizontal assemblies (ceilings) are intended to achieve the same results as described for vertical assemblies. Gypsum board and plaster ceilings are generally supported by a suspended metal grid framing system of metal channels or T-bars suspended by steel wires tied to the structure above. The ceiling covering may also be fastened directly to the structural framing member or furring, which is fastened to the structural frame. All ceiling support systems must comply with the structural load requirements of Chapter 16.

2504.1.1 Wood framing. Wood supports for lath, gypsum board or gypsum panel products, as well as wood stripping or furring, shall be not less than 50 mm nominal thickness in the least dimension.

Exception: The minimum nominal dimension of wood furring strips installed over solid backing shall be not less than 25 mm by 50 mm.

The minimum dimensions required by this section for wood supports for gypsum panel products, gypsum board or lath and plaster are intended to provide adequate support and reduce surface distortion due to warping of wood supports.

Wood furring strips attached to a solid backing may be used to support wall or ceiling covering. The furring must be installed with the wide face against the solid backing. This will provide a nominal 50 mm-wide nailing surface equal to the nailing surface of a standard wood stud, joist or rafter.

2504.1.2 Studless partitions. The minimum thickness of vertically erected studless solid plaster partitions of 10 mm and 20 mm rib metal lath, 12.5 mm -thick gypsum lath, gypsum board or gypsum panel product shall be 50 mm.

As the name implies, a studless partition is constructed of gypsum board, gypsum panel products lath or ribbed metal lath with plaster applied to each face, without the stud frame wall that typically provides support for the wall covering [see Commentary Figure 2504.1.2(1) and Figure 2504.1.2(2)]. The lath and plaster form the structural elements of the partition that must resist the lateral loads applied to the wall. Studless partitions may only be used as non-load-bearing partitions. They must comply with the deflection and general design requirements specified in Chapter 16.

## SECTION 2505 SHEAR
CONSTRUCTION

2505.1 Resistance to shear (wood framing). Wood-frame shear walls sheathed with gypsum board, gypsum panel products or lath and plaster shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Section 2306.3 and are permitted to resist wind and seismic loads. Walls resisting seismic loads and seismic loads. Walls resisting seismic loads shall be subject to the limitations in Section 12.2.1 of SBC 301.

Shear walls designed to resist wind and seismic loads, constructed of wood-framing members and sheathed with gypsum wallboard, gypsum panel products or lath and plaster are permitted by the code. Section 2306.3 includes seismic application limitations for wood-framed shear walls using gypsum board or lath and plaster as the finished wall surface and the limitations for such basic seismic-force-resisting systems are found in Section 12.2.1 of SBC 301.

Care must be taken when selecting gypsum board, gypsum panel products or plaster materials if they are being used as part of an exterior wall that will be exposed to the weather. Gypsum board, gypsum panel products, gypsum board lath, gypsum plaster and gypsum veneer plaster are not water resistant and are intended for interior applications only. Specific gypsum board materials covered with an appropriate exposed finish material or metal lath with cement plaster base coats and finish coat (stucco) are appropriate for exterior applications exposed to the weather.

2505.2 Resistance to shear (steel framing). Cold-formed steel-frame shear walls sheathed with gypsum board or gypsum panel products and constructed in accordance with the materials and provisions of Section 2211.1.1 are permitted to resist wind and seismic loads. Walls resisting seismic loads shall be subject to the limitations in Section 12.2.1 of SBC 301.

Shear walls designed to resist wind and seismic loads, constructed of light-gage steel stud framing members and sheathed with gypsum board or gypsum panel product are permitted by the code. Structural design guidelines and construction requirements for these shear walls are provided in Section 2211.1.1. Limitations for basic seismic force-resisting systems are found in Section 12.2.1 of SBC 301.

===== Page 1795 =====
## SECTION 2506 GYPSUM BOARD AND GYPSUM PANEL PRODUCT MATERIALS

2506.1 General. Gypsum board, gypsum panel products and accessories shall be identified by the manufacturer's designation to indicate compliance with the appropriate standards referenced in this section and stored to protect such materials from the weather.

This section contains the appropriate referenced standards for the proper use and quality of gypsum board and gypsum panel product materials and accessories. Gypsum board and gypsum panel products are the most commonly used interior wall coverings. Gypsum board and gypsum panel products are also used for exterior sheathing, plaster lath and ceiling covering. Because they are installed in sheet form, they are less labor intensive and generally considered more cost effective than other wall and ceiling materials, such as plaster. Gypsum board and gypsum panel products require a minimal amount of finishing and will readily accept paint, wallpaper, vinyl fabric, special textured paint and similar surface-finish materials.

All gypsum products, including gypsum board materials, are required to be identified with the manufacturer's designation. The manufacturer is required to certify that its product complies with the applicable standard for the gypsum product. This enables the installer and inspector to verify that the product is being properly installed and utilized.

Generally, all gypsum products and accessories are delivered to the job site in their original packages, containers or bundles. These products will be identified with the manufacturer's name, trademark and any applicable standard designations. For example, for gypsum board products, the thickness and type are shown on the end-bundling tapes or the board panel. The premixed paste products are identified on their container and bag products are appropriately identified on the face of the bag. With regard to weather protection, all gypsum products must be kept dry because of the deleterious effect of moisture. If properly stored above ground and fully protected from the weather and exposure to direct sunlight, gypsum products and accessories may be stored outside; however, the storage of gypsum board and gypsum panel product is not recommended in exterior locations. Exposure to the elements may result in water stain, light discoloration, mildew, loss of strength or sagging, all of which could hinder the structural and fire performance of the product, as well as the ability to be finished in the intended fashion. Gypsum board and gypsum panel product should be stored flat—never on edge or end.

2506.2 Standards. Gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall conform to the appropriate standards listed in Table 2506.2 and Chapter 35 and, where required for fire protection, shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 7.

Table 2506.2 lists the appropriate material standards for gypsum board and gypsum panel product materials and accessories. The most common building material used in Table 2506.2 is gypsum wallboard (also referred to as "gypsum board," "gyp. board" or "sheetrock"). ASTM C1396 provides the design specifications for gypsum board used for walls and ceilings. Gypsum board consists of a noncombustible core, which is primarily gypsum, and is surfaced with paper firmly bonded to the core. The paper surfacing material is less than 3 mm thick and has a flame spread index less than 25 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84. This requirement is in accordance with the fire-resistance requirements of Chapter 7 for composite materials classified as "noncombustible." Gypsum materials that are required to have a fire-resistance rating in accordance with the code must also comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 7. In addition, Chapter 7 establishes and defines the requirements for the fire-resistance ratings of building assemblies and structural components. Such assemblies are to be constructed in accordance with the test procedures as prescribed in the appropriate referenced standards listed in Chapter 35.

Table 2506.2 provides a list of the materials and accessories recognized by the code for use in gypsum board construction and makes reference to the appropriate ASTM or AISI standard for each. The installation of each of these materials must conform to all the requirements of the referenced standard. It is not the intent of the code, however, by way of this table, to limit or restrict alternative materials or accessories in the use of gypsum board and its associated incidentals as a building material acknowledged and approved by the code. Any and all materials not specifically mentioned, described or referenced, however, are subject to the requirements of the code, as well as the entire family of Saudi Codes.

In recent years, the gypsum industry has replaced several individual gypsum board product standards with the "umbrella" standard, ASTM C1396, Specification for Gypsum Board.

===== Page 1796 =====
By including ASTM C920, the code recognizes elastomeric joint sealants as an acceptable alternative to the traditional joint tape and compound. Some fire-resistance-rated assemblies have been successfully tested utilizing joints sealed with the elastomeric joint sealant material. The use of these materials must also comply with all applicable requirements in other parts of the code.

2506.2.1 Other materials. Metal suspension systems for acoustical and lay-in panel ceilings shall comply with ASTM C635 and Section 13.5.6 of SBC 301 for installation in high seismic areas.

Suspended ceiling systems are widely used in building construction of all types, as they provide for a cost-effective finished ceiling system that is versatile and adaptable to other building systems, such as heating, ventilating and air-conditioning systems (HVAC), fire suppression systems, lighting systems, etc. The standard developed for the manufacture and installation of suspended ceiling systems is ASTM C635. This standard contains minimum specifications for the metal suspension system, including system types (direct hung, indirect hung and furring bar type), structural classification (light-duty, intermediate-duty and heavy-duty), dimensional tolerances, coatings and physical testing for structural capacities.

Additional installation requirements are applicable for high seismic areas. These requirements include installation requirements for Seismic Design Categories C through F and are found in Section 13.5.6 of SBC 301.

## SECTION 2507 LATHING AND PLASTERING

2507.1 General. Lathing and plastering materials and accessories shall be marked by the manufacturer's designation to indicate compliance with the appropriate standards referenced in this section and stored in such a manner to protect them from the weather.

These basic requirements apply to lathing and plastering materials, products and accessories referenced in this chapter. This section requires that all lath and plaster materials be identified with the manufacturer's designation and indicate compliance with the appropriate standards. This enables the installer and the inspector to verify that a product is being installed in a manner that is consistent with its intended use. All accessories must also be marked with a reference to the appropriate standard. The manufacturer is required to certify that its product complies with the applicable standard for lathing and plastering material. Lath and plaster products and accessories are delivered to the job site in their original packages, containers or bundles. These products must be identified with the manufacturer's name, trademark and any applicable standard designations. With regard to weather protection, plaster products must be kept dry because of the deleterious effect of moisture. If properly stored above ground, fully protected from the weather and exposure to direct sunlight, and away from condensation and damp surfaces, lath and plaster products and accessories may be stored outside; however, it is not recommended.

2507.2 Standards. Lathing and plastering materials shall conform to the standards listed in Table 2507.2 and Chapter 35 and, where required for fire protection, shall also conform to the provisions of Chapter 7.

The appropriate referenced standards that regulate all lath and plastering materials are contained in this section. It also addresses the proper marking of materials, protection from weather and installation requirements. Additionally, provisions of Chapter 7 are referenced for building assemblies utilizing lath and plastering materials that require a fire-resistance rating; therefore, the assemblies must comply with the provisions of Chapter 7. Table 2507.2 provides a listing of the materials and accessories that are recognized in the code for use in plaster construction, along with the appropriate ASTM or AISI standard for each. The installation of each of these materials must conform to all requirements of the referenced standard. It is not the intent of the code to prevent alternative materials or accessories in the use of plaster and its associated incidentals as a building material acknowledged and approved by the code. Any materials not specifically mentioned, described or referenced herein are subject to the requirements of the code, as well as the entire family of Saudi Codes.

## SECTION 2508 GYPSUM CONSTRUCTION

2508.1 General. Gypsum board, gypsum panel products and gypsum plaster construction shall be of the materials listed in Table 2506.2 and Table 2507.2. These materials shall be assembled and installed in compliance with the appropriate standards listed in Table 2508.1 and Table 2511.1.1 and Chapter 35.

This section contains the referenced standards and requirements for the proper installation of gypsum construction.

This section references Table 2506.2 for the appropriate materials required in gypsum board, gypsum panel product and gypsum plaster construction, as well as the

===== Page 1797 =====
corresponding material standard. Table 2508.1 addresses the appropriate installation standards required for use in gypsum construction. Gypsum board or gypsum panel product in fire-resistance-rated assemblies is to be installed in accordance with the fastening schedule utilized in the tested assembly. The type and spacing of the fasteners are reflected in the fire test reports of various assemblies, including the summary of fire tests contained in various resource documents that compile summaries of fire test results, such as UL Fire Resistance Directory or the Gypsum Association's Fire Resistance Design Manual. Refer to Chapter 7 and its commentary for additional information related to fire-resistance-rated assemblies.

Gypsum plaster is available in several forms and is designed for a variety of applications, including those where fire protection of building components, construction of fire-resistance-rated assemblies within the building or control of sound transmission is needed. Gypsum plaster can be applied using a two-or three-coat method, depending on the backing or lathing system. Gypsum plaster provides a hard, smooth finish surface that will readily receive most decorative finishes, such as paint, vinyl wall fabric, wallpaper and textured paint. Various aggregates can be added to the plaster composition to achieve different surface textures, from a smooth towled to a heavily textured finish.

Table 2508.1 lists the installation requirements for the use of gypsum and gypsum-related construction products, along with the appropriate referenced standard for each. The installation of each of these materials must conform to all requirements of the referenced standard. There is no intent to limit or restrict alternative methods of construction acknowledged and approved by the code. Any methods not specifically mentioned, described or referenced herein are subject to the requirements of the code, as well as the entire family of Saudi Codes.

2508.2 Limitations. Gypsum wallboard or gypsum plaster shall not be used in any exterior surface where such gypsum construction will be exposed directly to the weather. Gypsum wallboard shall not be used where there will be direct exposure to water or continuous high humidity conditions. Gypsum sheathing shall be installed on exterior surfaces in accordance with ASTM C1280.

Because of the detrimental effect of moisture on gypsum products, gypsum-based materials and construction must be protected from the weather. See Section 202 for the definition of "Weather-exposed surfaces," which includes some limited conditions where gypsum board is permitted to be used on the outside of a building or structure.

2508.2.1 Weather protection. Gypsum wallboard, gypsum lath or gypsum plaster shall not be installed until weather protection for the installation is provided.

This section relates to the necessary environmental conditions for proper plaster application and hydration. Temperature limitations are needed to provide a uniform heating condition for a minimum of one week prior to the start of plastering, and are the same as the requirements stated in ASTM C842. This minimizes the movements or stresses caused by thermal changes, which in turn lower the chances of plaster cracking.

2508.3 Single-ply application. Edges and ends of gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall occur on the framing members, except those edges and ends that are perpendicular to the framing members. Edges and ends of gypsum board and gypsum panel products shall be in moderate contact except in concealed spaces where fire-resistance-rated construction, shear resistance or diaphragm action is not required.

The application of gypsum board and gypsum panel products is specified in this chapter for non-fire-resistant construction or construction where diaphragm (shear wall) action is not required. Chapter 7 and fire test reports will establish the means of fastening and supporting the ends and edges of gypsum board for non-fire-resistant assemblies. In the case of stud walls required for diaphragm action, Chapter 22 and 23 establish structural requirements such as sizes and spacing fasteners, allowable loads and the conditions of end and edge supports. Gypsum board is the generic name for a family of sheet products consisting of a noncombustible core, primarily composed of gypsum, with a paper surfacing on each face. The installation and finishing of gypsum board materials must comply with the referenced standards in Table 2508.1. GA 216, Application and Finishing of Gypsum Panel Products, published by the Gypsum Association, is the most commonly recommended specification for the installation and finishing of gypsum board and gypsum panel product.

Framing: As with any gypsum board or gypsum sheet product, it is critical to inspect the framing on which the gypsum material is to be attached. Finishing of gypsum board will be made extremely difficult when installed over unlevel, unplumb, out-of-square or structurally inadequate framing. All

===== Page 1798 =====
of these concerns must be satisfied before the installation of any gypsum board product can begin. Gypsum board can be attached to a variety of framing members, including but not necessarily limited to, wood or metal studs; joists and rafters; suspended metal-frame ceiling systems and wood or metal furring on concrete or masonry walls. Framing systems that are not installed square, level and plumb will create stress points where the gypsum board is attached to the framing. Stress points can cause the gypsum board to crack, shear or delaminate. This can become a significant issue where fire-resistance-rated assemblies are compromised.

- Fastening: The type of fastening devices and methods for attaching gypsum board to framing are dependent on the type of framing system being used and the type of assembly being constructed. Screws, nails and construction adhesives are approved types of fasteners. Fasteners are to be selected and installed as required by the specifications referenced in GA 216, except as required elsewhere in the code for fire-resistance-rated assemblies, shear wall construction or where more restrictive requirements are provided by the referenced standards listed in Chapter 35.

- Finishing: Gypsum must be finished with materials and accessories designed and approved for the application for which they are being used. Joint tape, joint compound and all accessories are to be approved and installed as recommended by the manufacturer and as required by the referenced standards.

- Multiple-ply application: This application of gypsum board is generally utilized to increase the fire-resistance rating of an assembly, the resistance of a shear wall assembly or the sound transmission class for an assembly. The construction and technical requirements for these and similar types of specialized assemblies are covered elsewhere in the Saudi Codes. The requirements for gypsum board itself are as defined in this chapter, except where more restrictive requirements are mandated for a specialized assembly.

2508.3.1 Floating angles. Fasteners at the top and bottom plates of vertical assemblies, or the edges and ends of horizontal assemblies perpendicular to supports, and at the wall line are permitted to be omitted except on shear resisting elements or fire-resistance-rated assemblies.
Fasteners shall be applied in such a manner as not to fracture the face paper with the fastener head.
Floating angles are the edges of gypsum board that are not directly fastened to a framing member where a change in the plane of the gypsum board occurs. Gypsum board used as part of a shear wall assembly or as a component part of any fire-resistance-rated assembly must have all edges fastened to a framing member. It is given that gypsum board used as part of a vertical assembly (wall) is fastened to the wall studs along the edges and in the field of the gypsum board as defined in GA 216. Adequate support for the weight of the gypsum board itself will be provided, therefore eliminating the need for additional fastening at the top and bottom plates of the wall framing. Fastening is not to be omitted at any inside or outside corner of a wall assembly.

Fasteners may be omitted at the edges of horizontal assemblies (ceiling and soffits) when the edge of the gypsum board is perpendicular to the framing member. As with wall assemblies, it is given that fasteners located along the edges and in the field of the gypsum board in accordance with GA 216 will provide adequate support for the weight of the gypsum board itself. Edges of horizontal gypsum board assemblies that are parallel to framing members must be fastened to the framing member except where the parallel edge is at the intersection of the wall and ceiling. Typically, the gypsum board will be installed on the ceiling before it is installed on the wall. The edge of the gypsum board on the wall will be butted against the underside edge of the ceiling board, providing additional edge support for the ceiling.

This section permits the elimination of unnecessary fastening of gypsum board in specific locations and conditions without compromising the integrity of the gypsum board support or fastening system. Gypsum board must always be fastened to prevent sagging, warping, waviness or any visual defects.

2508.4 Adhesives. Gypsum board and gypsum panel products secured to framing with adhesives in ceiling assemblies shall be attached using an approved fastening schedule. Expandable foam adhesives for fastening gypsum wallboard shall conform to ASTM D6464. Other adhesives for the installation of gypsum wallboard shall conform to ASTM C557.

This mandatory scoping provision clarifies that there are two separate adhesive standards listed in Table 2506.2 and that apply to different types of products, ASTM D6464 for expandable foam adhesives and ASTM C557.

===== Page 1799 =====
for all other types. Additionally, this section requires approved fastening methods for gypsum products used in ceiling assemblies.

2508.5 Joint treatment. Gypsum board and gypsum panel product fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall have joints and fasteners treated.

Exception: Joint and fastener treatment need not be provided where any of the following conditions occur:

1. Where the gypsum board or the gypsum panel product is to receive a decorative finish such as wood paneling, battens, acoustical finishes or any similar application that would be equivalent to joint treatment.

2. On single-layer systems where joints occur over wood framing members.

3. Square edge or tongue-and-groove edge gypsum board (V-edge), gypsum panel products, gypsum backing board or gypsum sheathing.

4. On multilayer systems where the joints of adjacent layers are offset.

5. Assemblies tested without joint treatment.

This section requires joint and fastener treatment for all gypsum board and gypsum panel product fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The code also identifies and permits exceptions where the gypsum board or gypsum panel product is to receive a decorative finish or any similar application that is considered to be equivalent to the joint or fastener treatment.

The exception lists five conditions where joint treatment is not required for assemblies tested without it:

1 Where the finish layer of gypsum board is to receive a decorative covering or similar type of applied material that will cover exposed joints, finishing of joints is not required; however, the applied material must provide the same fire-resistance rating as the assembly to which it is being applied.

2 Joint treatment is not required in single-layer applications where joints occur directly over wood-framing members. In effect, the additional joint treatment does not materially increase the fire-resistance rating of the assembly, and many partitions have been tested and passed the fire test without the added protection of joint and fastener treatment as part of the tested design.

3 Gypsum board with factory-designed edges that will prevent the penetration of smoke or fire into a rated assembly does not have to be finished. The factory edges listed will minimize gaps at joints and maintain the integrity of the assembly.
4 Multilayer assemblies with offset joints will eliminate any gaps in the system; therefore, fire smoke and harmful gases cannot readily penetrate the fire-resistance-rated assembly. This makes joint treatment unnecessary.

5 Where approved fire tests indicate that joint and fastener treatment is included as a part of the tested assembly, the code requires that joint and fastener treatment be applied in the same manner and extent as the approved test assembly. Where the approved test assembly does not specifically state whether joint or fastener treatment is part of the test assembly, the code requires that joint and fastener treatment is to be applied to any fire-resistance-rated assembly. Assemblies tested without joint treatment need not be finished.

As indicated elsewhere in this section, with regard to gypsum board and gypsum panel product application, joint and fastener treatment is primarily applied for aesthetic reasons and to provide a satisfactory finish surface for the application of decorative finishes, such as paint, wallpaper, vinyl wall fabric, textured paint or a number of other finishes used for the appearance of a rated or nonrated assembly.

2508.6 Horizontal gypsum board or gypsum panel product diaphragm ceilings. Gypsum board or gypsum panel products shall be permitted to be used on wood joists to create a horizontal diaphragm ceiling in accordance with Table 2508.6.

Generally, a gypsum board or gypsum panel product ceiling does not serve as a load-carrying structural element for other than its own weight. This section provides installation requirements [refer to Commentary Figure 2508.6(1)] that allow the use of a horizontal gypsum board or gypsum panel product ceiling diaphragm. This permits a wood-framed ceiling to carry limited lateral loads, such as a portion of the component earthquake force on a partition as shown in Commentary Figure 2508.6(2).

Table 2508.6 provides the shear capacity that is to be used in designing a horizontal gypsum board or gypsum panel product ceiling diaphragm. Since the material thickness and fastener size do not vary, the capacity is strictly a function of the framing member spacing. Further qualifications on the tabulated shear capacities that are stated in the footnotes include: ceiling diaphragm capacities are not cumulative with other diaphragm capacities; the capacities given are applicable to short-term loads caused by wind and earthquakes; and, in structures classified as Seismic Design Category D, E or F, the capacities must be reduced by 50 percent.

===== Page 1800 =====
2508.6.1 Diaphragm proportions. The maximum allowable diaphragm proportions shall be 1½:1 between shear resisting elements. Rotation or cantilever conditions shall not be permitted.

Limiting the diaphragm proportions and prohibiting cantilevers and rotation serves to limit the deflection and distortion of the ceiling diaphragm [see Commentary Figure 2508.6(1)].

2508.6.2 Installation. Gypsum board or gypsum panel products used in a horizontal diaphragm ceiling shall be installed perpendicular to ceiling framing members. End joints of adjacent courses of gypsum board shall not occur on the same joist.

The installation requirements of this section are necessary to obtain the shear capacities indicated in Table 2508.6.

2508.6.3 Blocking of perimeter edges. Perimeter edges shall be blocked using a wood member not less than 50 mm by 150 mm nominal dimension. Blocking material shall be installed flat over the top plate of the wall to provide a nailing surface not less than 50 mm in width for the attachment of the gypsum board or gypsum panel product.

This section states the minimum required edge blocking that is illustrated in Commentary Figure 2508.6.3.

2508.6.4 Fasteners. Fasteners used for the attachment of gypsum board or gypsum panel products to a horizontal diaphragm ceiling shall be as defined in Table 2508.6. Fasteners shall be spaced not more than 175 mm mm on center at all supports, including perimeter blocking, and not more than 10 mm from the edges and ends of the gypsum board or gypsum panel product.

This provision establishes maximum fastener spacing and minimum edge distances for gypsum board and gypsum panel product ceiling diaphragms.

2508.6.5 Lateral force restrictions. Gypsum board or gypsum panel products shall not be used in diaphragm ceilings to resist lateral forces imposed by masonry or concrete construction.

This section prohibits the use of a gypsum board or gypsum panel product ceiling diaphragms in resisting lateral loads caused by masonry or concrete.

## SECTION 2509 SHOWERS AND WATER CLOSETS

2509.1 Wet areas. Showers and public toilet walls shall conform to Section 1210.2.

Special caution must be taken when gypsum board is used in applications where it will be exposed to moisture, because gypsum is not naturally resistant to water, humidity or other forms of moisture. Failure of gypsum board can be caused by direct or indirect exposure to all forms of moisture. Moisture-resistant gypsum board, which is faced with moisture-resistant paper, must be used in high moisture areas, and additional protection such as paint must be applied to prevent gypsum board from being exposed to moisture. Moisture-resistant gypsum board is known and referred to as "green board," because of the distinctive green moisture-resistant paper that is applied to it, which also makes it readily identifiable as moisture resistant.

Wet areas at interior locations, such as those identified in Section 1209.2, must be protected from moisture by a non-absorbent wall or ceiling material. Cement plaster (gypsum plaster is not permitted in wet areas) and tile or other like finish materials will provide moisture protection for the wall surface. An additional waterproofing membrane must be provided where the wall is constructed of wood framing (see related commentary, Section 2511.5).

2509.2 Base for tile. Materials used as a base for wall tile in tub and shower areas and wall and ceiling panels in shower areas shall be of materials listed in Table 2509.2 and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. Water-resistant gypsum backing board shall be used as a base for tile in water closet compartment walls when installed in accordance with GA-216 or ASTM C840 and the manufacturer's recommendations. Regular gypsum wallboard is permitted under tile or wall panels in other wall and ceiling areas when installed in accordance with GA-216 or ASTM C840.

In areas that have routine exposure to heavy concentrations of water, it is necessary to use materials that are resistant to moisture as a backing for tile. Table 2509.2 lists materials for use as a base for wall tile in tub and shower areas and wall and ceiling panels in shower areas. The code also requires that moisture-resistant gypsum board (green board) is to be used as a base for ceramic and other hard tiles for water closet compartment walls. It can be used in these locations because of its resistance to incidental moisture exposure. All joints in gypsum board that will be covered by tile or wall panels must be taped and finished even though they will be unexposed to view when the installation of the wall-covering material is complete. This is necessary to prevent moisture from migrating through the unfinished joints and causing damage to the gypsum board and the wall-framing system. Corrosion-resistant fasteners must be used in wet areas.

===== Page 1801 =====
This table lists the materials, and the applicable referenced standard for each, that are recognized for use as a base for wall tile in tub and shower areas and wall and ceiling panels in shower areas.

2509.3 Limitations. Water-resistant gypsum backing board shall not be used in the following locations:

1 Over a vapor retarder in shower or bathtub compartments.

2 Where there will be direct exposure to water or in areas subject to continuous high humidity.

Although there are many gypsum board sheet products that are manufactured and approved for use in wet areas or areas exposed to moisture or humidity, there are still some extreme conditions where even water-resistant gypsum board will not provide the level of moisture protection necessary:

Gypsum board installed on the walls and ceilings at shower and bathtub areas must be finished to prevent moisture from penetrating the wall or ceiling finish and contacting the gypsum board. The finish applied to the exposed face of the gypsum board, in effect, creates a water-resistant barrier that not only stops water from getting to the gypsum board, but also prevents the release of moisture from within the wall or the gypsum board itself. For this reason, gypsum board must not be installed over the outboard side of any vapor barrier or retarder. This will create a waterproof membrane on both faces of the gypsum board, causing moisture to be trapped in the gypsum board that will ultimately cause it to decompose and fail.

2 Water-resistant gypsum board is not to be used in areas that will be subject to direct exposure to water or continuous exposure to high humidity at locations such as saunas, steam rooms, gang showers or indoor pools. Gypsum board products, including the water-resistant type, are not intended for these extreme conditions and will provide unsatisfactory performance. Non-gypsum wall and ceiling materials such as concrete masonry, ceramic tile on cement backer board, cement plaster (stucco) or other materials designed and recommended for high moisture exposure must be used in these locations.

## SECTION 2510 LATHING AND FURRING FOR CEMENT PLASTER (STUCCO)

2510.1 General. Exterior and interior cement plaster and lathing shall be done with the appropriate materials listed in Table 2507.2 and Chapter 35.

This section contains the appropriate referenced standards for materials and proper application and protection of interior and exterior lath and furring for the installation of cement plaster (often referred to as "stucco"). Cement plaster is a cementitious-based plaster material with excellent water-resistant properties. It is the only type of plaster that the code recognizes as an exterior wall covering. Cement plaster can also be used as an interior finish wall covering.

Table 2507.2 lists the appropriate material standards for Portland cement, metal lath and plastering materials. These referenced standards are the minimum material specifications required by this section, as well as related requirements elsewhere in the code for the proper application and procedures for lath and furring for cement plaster.

2510.2 Weather protection. Materials shall be stored in such a manner as to protect them from the weather.

Like gypsum products, cement stucco lathing and plastering materials must be stored to prevent the deleterious effect of the weather.

2510.3 Installation. Installation of these materials shall be in compliance with ASTM C926 and ASTM C1063.

Table 2511.1.1 refers to ASTM C1063 as the standard specification for interior and exterior lathing and furring for cement-based plastering, as specified in ASTM C926. Where a fire-resistance rating is required for plastered assemblies and construction, details of the construction must be in accordance with the reports for the fire test assemblies that have met the requirements of the fire-resistance rating imposed. Where a specific degree of sound control is required for plastered assemblies and construction, details of construction must be in accordance with official test reports conducted in recognized testing laboratories in accordance with the applicable requirements of ASTM E90.

Table 2511.1.1 also refers to ASTM C1063 as the standard specification for the installation of Portland cement-based plaster. For exterior (stucco) and interior work, ASTM C1063 provides the requirements for proportioning various plaster mixes and thicknesses (refer to Section 2512 for additional requirements for cement plaster).

2510.4 Corrosion resistance. Metal lath and lath attachments shall be of corrosion-resistant material.

Because of the amount of water that is present in plaster when it is mixed and applied to a surface, all metal components and

===== Page 1802 =====
accessories, such as metal lath; screws; screeds; grounds; metal runners at the edges of the plaster; expansion and control joint molding; or any other metal component that will be in contact with the plaster, must be protected from corrosion and rusting from prolonged contact with wet plaster. Corrosion of metal components will cause failure and create voids in the plaster that will allow moisture to get into the wall and cause damage to the structural and nonstructural elements of the building. For these reasons, the code requires metal components made of corrosion-resistant materials. Table 2507.2 provides a listing of the required material standards for lath and related accessories.

2510.5 Backing. Backing or a lath shall provide sufficient rigidity to permit plaster applications.

Proper application of exterior plaster requires that the base coat is thoroughly pushed through the lath to provide the required mechanical bond. For this reason, it is required by the code that the lath and its backing provide sufficient rigidity to permit the proper application of the plaster. A common method of providing a rigid backing for the lath for exterior plaster over open wood or metal stud framing is to fasten 18-gage wire backing (see Commentary Figure 2510.5) to the studs at 150 mm on center horizontally. It is critical to stretch the wire tightly across the face of the studs to provide the desired rigidity for the backing. The wire backing must be attached to each stud to prevent slippage or movement of the wire.

2510.5.1 Support of lath. Where lath on vertical surfaces extends between rafters or other similar projecting members, solid backing shall be installed to provide support for lath and attachments.

It is important for the lath to be supported continuously along all edges. Continuous edge support is necessary to prevent excessive movement of the finished plaster, which can result in unwanted cracking. This is particularly critical on exterior vertical surfaces of cement plaster because cracking provides an entry point for water into the building. At locations where the wall plane is interrupted at regular intervals, such as eaves and soffits where rafter ends project beyond the face of the wall, the code requires that the lath be supported by solid backing at all edges. In addition to supporting the edges of the lath, the code requires that all plaster trim, edging, screeds, grounds and other accessories be rigidly supported with solid backing at all edges.

The damage to finished plaster on an exterior vertical surface due to unsupported edges is much more obvious than damage that would be expected on an interior surface; however, failure of interior wall surfaces is also a concern. For this reason, the code makes no distinction between interior and exterior surfaces. Solid backing is required for lath at all locations, whether interior or exterior.

2510.5.2 Use of gypsum backing board. Gypsum backing for cement plaster shall be in accordance with Section 2510.5.2.1 or 2510.5.2.2.

The code does not permit the use of gypsum board or gypsum lath as a backing for cement plaster, except as noted in Section 2510.5.2.1

2510.5.2.1 Gypsum board as a backing board. Gypsum lath or gypsum wallboard shall not be used as a backing for cement plaster.

Exception: Gypsum lath or gypsum wallboard is permitted, with a water-resistive barrier, as a backing for self-furred metal lath or self-furred wire fabric lath and cement plaster where either of the following conditions occur:

1. On horizontal supports of ceilings or roof soffits.

2. On interior walls.

Because of its excellent water-resistant properties, cement plaster is the only type permitted by the code for use as a finished exterior surface exposed to the weather, or at an interior location subject to excessive moisture. Gypsum has none of the water-resistant properties possessed by cement-based plasters or cementitious backer boards, which are designed specifically for use in high moisture areas. Because of the inability of gypsum-based materials to resist moisture, the code does not permit the use of gypsum board or gypsum lath as an interior or exterior backing in direct contact with cement plaster. Gypsum board lath subjected to moisture will decompose and cause failure to the entire plaster system, including the outer or finished coats. Exceptions to this restriction are permitted when gypsum is protected from contact with cement plaster as allowed in specific locations described below.

Gypsum lath and gypsum wallboard are permitted to be used as a backing for cement plaster when a water-resistive barrier, such as Grade D building paper, is installed at the back of the lath or to the face of the gypsum board to prevent the cement plaster from contacting the gypsum backing. The building paper must be securely attached to the face of the gypsum board before installing the self-furring metal lath or self-furring wire fabric to create a water-resistive barrier. Items 1 and 2 of the exception indicate locations where this may be applied.

===== Page 1803 =====
2510.5.2.2 Gypsum sheathing backing. Gypsum sheathing is permitted as a backing for metal or wire fabric lath and cement plaster on walls. A water-resistive barrier shall be provided in accordance with Section 2510.6.

Gypsum board sheathing is permitted to be used as a backer for cement plaster when installed with a water-resistive barrier as described in Section 2510.5.2.1 and as required in Section 2510.6.

2510.5.3 Backing not required. Wire backing is not required under expanded metal lath or paper-backed wire fabric lath.

Because metal lath or paper-backed wire fabric lath has reinforcing ribs to provide necessary rigidity, the code requires no additional backing for these materials.

2510.6 Water-resistive barriers. Water-resistive barriers shall be installed as required in Section 1403.2 and, where applied over wood-based sheathing, shall comply with Section 2510.6.1 or 2510.6.2.

The code requires that a water-resistive barrier be installed behind exterior plaster, as it does for any exterior wall veneer, in Section 1403.2

2510.6.1 Dry climates. One of the following shall apply for dry (B) climate zones:

1 The water-resistive barrier shall be two layers of 10-minute Grade D paper or have a water resistance equal to or greater than two layers of water-resistive barrier complying with ASTM E2556, Type I. The individual layers shall be installed independently such that each layer provides a separate continuous plane and any flashing, installed in accordance with Section 1404.4 and intended to drain to the water-resistive barrier, is directed between the layers.

2 The water-resistive barrier shall be 60-minute Grade D paper or have a water resistance equal to or greater than one layer of water-resistive barrier complying with ASTM E2556, Type II. The water-resistive barrier shall be separated from the stucco by a layer of foam plastic insulating sheathing or other nonwater absorbing layer, or a drainage space.

In dry climates, the option for a barrier equivalent to a two-layer water resistive barrier meeting the requirements of ASTM E2556, Type I is based on the problems that have been observed when only one layer is applied over wood sheathing.

Such wood sheathing eventually exhibits dry rot caused by the penetration of moisture. Cracking is then created in the plaster because of movement of the sheathing caused by expansion and contraction. Field experience has shown that where two layers of a water-resistive barrier are used, moisture penetration is considerably decreased, as is the cracking of the plaster. The code also requires each layer of the water-resistive barrier to be independently installed in a manner that provides a continuous drainage plane. The primary function of the inboard layer is to keep water away from the sheathing and from penetrating into the stud cavity. This layer should be integrated with window and door flashings, the weep screed at the bottom of the wall as well as any through-wall flashings or expansion joints. The primary function of the outboard layer, which comes in contact with the stucco, is to separate the stucco from the inboard layer of the water-resistive barrier. This layer is at times referred to as a "sacrificial layer," an "intervening layer" or a "bond break layer."

The code permits the application of alternative standard practices by recognizing stucco systems in which one of the two layers of the water-resistive barrier is replaced by a layer that provides separation from the wet stucco application and provides a barrier to moisture from the stucco to the sheathing.

2510.6.2 Moist or marine climates. In moist (A) or marine (C) climate zones, water-resistive barrier shall comply with one of the following:

1 In addition to complying with Item 1 or 2 of Section 2510.6.1, a space or drainage material not less than 5 mm in depth shall be applied to the exterior side of the water-resistive barrier.

2 In addition to complying with Item 2 of Section 2510.6.1, drainage on the exterior side of the water-resistive barrier shall have a minimum drainage efficiency of 90 percent as measured in accordance with ASTM E2273 or Annex A2 of ASTM E2925.

Moist (A) or marine (C) climate areas typically have the greatest susceptibility to mold issues, making it important to limit the infiltration of moisture.

2510.7 Preparation of masonry and concrete. Surfaces shall be clean, free from efflorescence, sufficiently damp and rough for proper bond. If the surface is insufficiently rough, approved bonding agents or a Portland cement dash bond coat mixed in proportions of not more than two parts volume of sand to one part volume of Portland cement or plastic cement shall be applied. The dash bond coat shall be left undisturbed and shall be moist cured not less than 24 hours.

===== Page 1804 =====
The masonry surface must be properly prepared to receive the cement plaster base coat to ensure proper bond between the masonry base and the plaster. Masonry surfaces must be clean, damp, free of dust and efflorescence and reasonably flat, without excessive protrusions or indentations. These irregularities will affect the evenness and uniform thickness of the finished plaster. Mortar joints should be struck flush to help minimize any surface irregularities.

Masonry bases for plaster have varying degrees of suction (water absorption rate) but generally provide a good adhesive as well as mechanical bond. Most masonry bases have enough suction so that special bonding agents will not be required to achieve the adequate bond between the plaster and the base. Where denser and harder masonry materials that have very low suction characteristics are used, preparation of the surface, similar to that of concrete, may be necessary. Such preparation can include mechanical scoring or the use of chemical bonding agents.

Concrete generally has a denser and tighter finished surface than masonry. Concrete does not have the same suction properties as masonry; therefore, the bond between concrete and plaster must be completely mechanical. Like masonry, the concrete surface must be clean, rough, damp and free of efflorescence and form-releasing agents. If the surface of the concrete is not adequately rough to provide the required mechanical bond, it may be prepared as follows:

If preparation of the surface is to begin before the concrete is completely set, the surface can be roughened with a metal tool or by using a stiff, heavy-duty wire brush.

If preparation of the concrete surface must be done after the concrete has hardened, the surface may be bush hammered or roughened with chisels or tools designed for that purpose.

Another common method, which is specified in this section, is to apply a rich mixture of Portland cement, sand and water as a dash coat. This application, in which the material is "dashed" onto the concrete surface with a course brush, may only be used where Portland cement plaster is going to be applied to the concrete surface.

• A liquid bonding agent is applied.

## SECTION 2511 INTERIOR PLASTER

2511.1 General. Plastering gypsum plaster or cement plaster shall be not less than three coats where applied over metal lath or wire fabric lath and not less than two coats where applied over other bases permitted by this chapter.

Exception: Gypsum veneer plaster and cement plaster specifically designed and approved for one-coat applications.

This section is intended to define the standards and guidelines for the materials and installation of interior plaster. The requirements of this section cover gypsum plaster, gypsum veneer plaster and cement plaster. This section also addresses plaster applied to nonlath surfaces and the environmental conditions for which interior plaster is stored and installed.

Interior surfaces are all surfaces, exposed and unexposed to view, on the inside of a building or structure that are not subject to damage or failure due to the effects of uncontrollable weather conditions, such as rain and wind. Interior surfaces are generally exposed to mechanically controlled climatic conditions through air-conditioning, heating and humidity control. Because of these controls, interior surfaces require far less restrictions than exterior surfaces; therefore, the quantities and types of materials and finishes permitted for use on interior surfaces are greatly increased. It is the consensus of the industry that multicoat work is necessary for control of plaster thickness and density, particularly where plaster application is done by hand because most of the materials used for plaster compact under hand application as a result of pressure applied to the trowel. Experience has proven that this change in density is more controllable and will be more uniform when the plaster is applied in thin, successive layers. For this reason, the code requires three-coat plastering over metal lath or wire fabric lath and two-coat work applied over other plaster bases [see Commentary Figure 2511.1(1) and Figure 2511.1(2)]. Reducing the requirements for plaster bases other than metal or wire lath depends on the rigidity of the plaster base itself. More rigid plaster bases are not as susceptible to variations in thickness and flatness of the surface. The first coat in three-coat work on a flexible base, such as wire lath, is used to stiffen that base to provide the rigidity necessary to attain uniform thickness and surface flatness.

Gypsum veneer plaster, as specified in ASTM C843, is specifically designed to be applied as a one coat plaster and is recognized by the code for that application. Gypsum veneer plaster must be applied over a solid base such as gypsum board lath, gypsum base for veneer plaster, concrete or concrete unit masonry. Although gypsum veneer plaster is designed to be applied in one coat, it can be applied in two coats, as long as the maximum thickness does

===== Page 1805 =====
not exceed 6 mm. Gypsum veneer plaster provides a hard, smooth finish surface, much like three-coat gypsum plaster, that will readily receive a variety of decorative finishes.

Any one-coat system must be applied over a solid base in accordance with the code, a referenced standard or the product manufacturer's instructions.

2511.1.1 Installation. Installation of lathing and plaster materials shall conform to Table 2511.1.1 and Section 2507.

This section refers to Section 2507 for the standards to regulate the installation of gypsum lath and related gypsum board materials and accessories. The expected performance of a product or material is dependent on proper installation. Table 2511.1.1 lists the installation standards for plaster construction.

Table 2511.1.1 provides the installation standards required by the code for plaster construction. This table also includes installation standards for related construction materials.

2511.2 Limitations. Plaster shall not be applied directly to fiber insulation board. Cement plaster shall not be applied directly to gypsum lath or gypsum plaster except as specified in Sections 2510.5.1 and 2510.5.2.

Fiber insulation board does not have the qualities necessary to provide an acceptable base for the application of plaster. It absorbs excessive moisture from the plaster mix that creates problems of workmanship, and it does not have the structural properties to provide the stability and rigidity required for a proper functioning plaster base. In colder and damper climates, fiberboard insulation retains the moisture absorbed from the plaster for a relatively longer period of time than other more dense bases. This lack of density and excessive retention of moisture will cause the premature failure of the plaster. For these reasons, the code prohibits the use of fiber insulation as a plaster base.

Cement plaster will not bond properly to gypsum plaster bases; therefore, the code prohibits the use of cement plaster on this material. The code does, however, permit the use of exterior plaster to be applied on horizontal surfaces, such as ceilings and soffits, over gypsum lath and gypsum board when used as a backing for metal lath.

2511.3 Grounds. Where installed, grounds shall ensure the minimum thickness of plaster as set forth in ASTM C842 and ASTM C926. Plaster thickness shall be measured from the face of lath and other bases.
Plaster grounds are utilized to establish and maintain the required thickness of plaster. Grounds are usually wood or metal strips of a known thickness attached to the plaster base. The intent is that plaster grounds are used as a guide for the straightedge in determining the thickness of the plaster. Door or window frames are used as plaster grounds. Dollops of plaster of the desired thickness may also be used as grounds.

2511.4 Interior masonry or concrete. Condition of surfaces shall be as specified in Section 2510.7. Approved specially prepared gypsum plaster designed for application to concrete surfaces or approved acoustical plaster is permitted. The total thickness of base coat plaster applied to concrete ceilings shall be as set forth in ASTM C842 or ASTM C926. Should ceiling surfaces require more than the maximum thickness permitted in ASTM C842 or ASTM C926, metal lath or wire fabric lath shall be installed on such surfaces before plastering.

Special gypsum plaster and acoustical plaster that are specifically designed and manufactured for direct application to concrete masonry unit walls, concrete walls and ceilings without a gypsum board or metal lath base are permitted by the code. Special care must be taken to properly prepare the masonry or concrete surfaces that are to receive a plaster finish to ensure both proper bond of the plaster and the desired or required levelness of the finished surface. Preparation of masonry and concrete surfaces is discussed in Section 2510.7.

Where a concrete ceiling is to receive a plaster finish, the code requires a total thickness of the base coat plaster as required by the referenced standards in this section. For applications of plaster on concrete ceiling surfaces, a thinner coat is required than for other applications. This is due primarily to the difficulty of achieving an adequate bond between the plaster and the concrete surface. Because of the horizontal application, the weight of the plaster base coat must be kept to a minimum. If it becomes necessary to increase the thickness of the plaster beyond the maximum allowed—due, for example, to the unevenness of the concrete surface—metal lath or wire fabric lath must be attached to the concrete ceiling surface to provide anchorage for the weight of the additional plaster.

2511.5 Wet areas. Showers and public toilet walls shall conform to Sections 1210.2 and 1210.3. Where wood frame walls and partitions are covered on the interior with cement plaster or tile of similar material and are subject to water splash, the framing

===== Page 1806 =====
shall be protected with an approved moisture barrier.

Wet areas at interior locations such as those identified in Sections 1210.2 and 1210.3 must be protected from moisture by non-absorbent wall or ceiling material. Cement plaster (gypsum plaster is not permitted in wet areas) and tile or other like materials will provide moisture protection for the wall surface, provided an additional waterproofing membrane is installed where the wall is constructed of wood framing.

## SECTION 2512 EXTERIOR PLASTER

2512.1 General. Plastering with cement plaster shall be not less than three coats where applied over metal lath or wire fabric lath or gypsum board backing as specified in Section 2510.5 and shall be not less than two coats where applied over masonry or concrete. If the plaster surface is to be completely covered by veneer or other facing material, or is completely concealed by another wall, plaster application need only be two coats, provided that the total thickness is as set forth in ASTM C926.

This section is intended to define the standards and guidelines for the type of materials and installation of exterior plaster. The requirements of this section include the limitations of gypsum plaster and gypsum veneer plaster. This section will also address plaster applied to solid backings, alternative application methods, curing and plaster additives. Guidelines and requirements for preventing water infiltration into the building are discussed in this section.

Exterior surfaces are the vertical and horizontal surfaces located on the outside of a building or structure that are subject to weather conditions such as wind, changes in temperature, humidity, moisture and dampness. The most common way to protect exterior surfaces from damage caused by rain, wind or weather from other sources is by the use of building materials that are designed, manufactured and installed to resist or withstand these extreme weather conditions. There are isolated surfaces located on the exterior of a building or structure that are not directly exposed to or in contact with the damaging effects of the weather (see definition of "Weather exposed surfaces").

Cement plaster (stucco) is the only type approved by the code for the use of exterior plaster finish. Exterior cement plasters are required by the code to be applied in not less than three coats when applied over expanded metal, gypsum board backing or wire fabric lath for the same reasons discussed for interior plaster (see commentary, Section 2511.1.1 and Commentary Figure 2512.1). When cement plaster is applied over solid bases that are rigid, the code permits the application of a two-coat plaster system. The code also allows plaster work that is going to be completely concealed to be applied as a two-coat system, provided the total thickness meets the requirements of ASTM C926, because the finish coat (second coat) of plaster will be the surface that will receive the exterior finish, such as paint, and it is critical for the finish coat to provide a clean, smooth and visually acceptable surface. Where the plaster surface is to be completely concealed, it is not necessary to provide a finish coat.

2512.1.1 On-grade floor slab. On wood frame or steel stud construction with an on-grade concrete floor slab system, exterior plaster shall be applied in such a manner as to cover, but not to extend below, the lath and paper. The application of lath, paper and flashing or drip greens shall comply with ASTM C1063.

The code requires that the exterior plaster be installed to completely cover, but not extend below, the lath and paper (moisture barrier membrane) on wood or metal stud exterior wall construction supported by a concrete slab-on-grade floor. This requirement, combined with the requirement for a continuous weep screed as described in Section 2512.1.2, is intended to prevent the entrapment and subsequent channeling of free moisture to the interior of the building.

2512.1.2 Weep screeds. A minimum 0.5 mm (No. 26 galvanized sheet gage), corrosion-resistant weep screed with a minimum vertical attachment flange of 90 mm shall be provided at or below the foundation plate line on exterior stud walls in accordance with ASTM C926. The weep screed shall be placed not less than 100 mm above the earth or 50 mm above paved areas and be of a type that will allow trapped water to drain to the exterior of the building. The water-resistive barrier shall lap the attachment flange. The exterior lath shall cover and terminate on the attachment flange of the weep screed.

Water and moisture can penetrate an exterior plaster wall for a variety of reasons and in a number of ways. It is expected that some moisture will penetrate the plaster in an exterior wall; therefore, the design of the wall should include a weep screed, which will provide a way to release the moisture (see Commentary Figure 2512.1.2). Once water or moisture penetrates the plaster, it will migrate down the exterior wall face of the water-resistive barrier until it reaches the sill plate or mud sill. At this point, the water will seek a way out of the wall. If the exterior plaster system is not detailed and constructed with provisions to allow the

===== Page 1807 =====
moisture to escape to the exterior, it will find its own way out. This exit will almost certainly be through the interior of the wall and cause leaking and damage to the interior of the building. For this reason, the code requires a continuous weep screed at the bottom of exterior walls to permit the moisture to escape to the exterior of the building.

2512.2 Plasticity agents. Only approved plasticity agents and approved amounts thereof shall be added to Portland cement or blended cements. Where plastic cement or masonry cement is used, additional lime or plasticizers shall not be added. Hydrated lime or the equivalent amount of lime putty used as a plasticizer is permitted to be added to cement plaster or cement and lime plaster in an amount not to exceed that set forth in ASTM C926.

Admixtures, such as plasticizers, should not be added to Portland cement or blended cement unless approved by the building official. Some admixtures can create harmful effects that more than offset the desired improvement in plasticity. It is preferable that plasticizers be added during the manufacturing of the cement for product uniformity and proper proportions. When plastic cement is used, the code does not allow any further additions of plasticizers because the amount added during the manufacturing process is adequate and is the maximum amount permitted. Hydrated lime and lime putty are time-tested plasticizers used with cement plaster, and their use is permitted by the code in the amounts specified in ASTM C926 as referenced herein.

2512.3 Limitations. Gypsum plaster shall not be used on exterior surfaces.

Gypsum veneer plaster, gypsum plaster or any other similar gypsum-based plaster materials are not permitted for use as an exterior finish material. Gypsum-based plaster is subject to deterioration and ultimate failure when it is exposed to exterior weather conditions such as excessive heat, humidity and moisture, which are unavoidable on exterior surfaces of a building.

2512.4 Cement plaster. Plaster coats shall be protected from freezing for a period of not less than 24 hours after set has occurred. Plaster shall be applied when the ambient temperature is higher than  \( 4^{\circ} \) C, unless provisions are made to keep cement plaster work above  \( 4^{\circ} \) C during application and 48 hours thereafter.

Cement plaster contains a high percentage of water when it is mixed and applied, and before the process of curing is complete. For this reason, it is adversely affected by cold weather and freezing in much the same way that cement mortar and concrete are affected.
When cement plaster is applied in freezing weather, to a frozen base or is mixed with frozen ingredients, it loses a high proportion of its strength and, therefore, does not comply with the requirements of the code. Plaster materials must be stored to protect them from adverse weather conditions and should only be installed when weather conditions are within the requirements of the code and will remain so for the duration of the curing process.

2512.5 Second-coat application. The second coat shall be brought out to proper thickness, riddled and floated sufficiently rough to provide adequate bond for the finish coat. The second coat shall not have variations greater than 6.5 mm in any direction under a 1500 mm straight edge.

In plaster work, a base coat is any coat beneath the finish coat. This is true whether the plaster is a two-coat or three-coat application. In a three-coat application, the first coat is usually referred to as the "scratch" coat. It is usually applied over a flexible base, such as expanded metal or wire fabric lath, and is intended to stiffen the base and provide a mechanical bond to the base. As the name implies, the first coat is scratched with a scarifying tool to provide a series of horizontal ridges or scratches that are intended to provide mechanical keys for the application of the second coat (or brown coat). The brown coat usually constitutes the major bulk of the plaster and, consequently, materially affects the membrane strength. As a result, proportioning and workability are critical, and the mix should have high plasticity for proper application. The term "brown coat" is utilized by the trade to differentiate the color of the second coat from the finish coat. The finish coat is usually much lighter in color than the second coat.

2512.6 Curing and interval. First and second coats of cement plaster shall be applied and moist cured as set forth in ASTM C926 and Table 2512.6.

Sufficient time between coats is to be allowed to permit each coat to cure or develop enough rigidity to resist cracking or other physical damage when the next coat is applied. The proper amount of moisture must be provided to the plaster mix to allow for the proper curing time for each coat. The most effective procedure for curing and the time required between each coat will depend on the climate and job conditions. Moist or fog curing will permit and control the continuous hydration of cementitious materials.

The timing between coats will vary with climate conditions and the type of plaster base being used. Table 2512.6 specifies the minimum curing times between coats; however, temperature and relative humidity will extend or

===== Page 1808 =====
reduce the curing time required between consecutive coats. Cold or wet weather will increase the required curing time, while hot or dry weather will shorten it. Moderate changes in temperature and humidity can be controlled by providing additional heating during cold and damp weather, and by reducing the loss of moisture by prewetting during hot or dry weather.

All the conditions mentioned above must be taken into consideration when selecting the most appropriate method of curing based on the application being considered and the job conditions present during the curing process. Any of the three curing methods listed below, or any combination of the three, are permitted by the code:

1 Moist curing is accomplished by applying a fine fog spray of water as often as required to retain moisture and control the rate of curing. Moisture is generally applied two times a day—once in the morning and again in the late afternoon or evening—although job conditions are more of a factor than a predetermined time schedule. Care must be taken to avoid erosion damage to cement plaster surfaces due to excessive amounts of water running down vertical surfaces. Except in extreme or severe drying conditions, the wetting of the finish coat should be avoided.

2 Plastic film, when taped or weighted down around the perimeter of the plastered work area, will provide a vapor barrier to retain the moisture between the membrane and the plaster. Care must be taken when placing the plastic film around the work area. If the film is placed too soon before the plaster is allowed to stiffen, the film can come into contact with the wet plaster and damage the surface texture. If too much time is allowed before placing the film, an excessive amount of moisture will have escaped causing premature curing, which can cause cracking to the finished plaster.

3 Canvas, cloth or sheet material barriers can be erected to deflect sunlight and wind, both of which will affect the rate of evaporation. If the humidity is very low, this method alone may not provide adequate protection.

2512.7 Application to solid backings. Where applied over gypsum backing as specified in Section 2510.5 or directly to unit masonry surfaces, the second coat is permitted to be applied as soon as the first coat has attained sufficient hardness.

When plaster is applied directly to a solid backing such as gypsum board lath, concrete or concrete masonry, the minimum time intervals listed in Table 2512.6 are not required between the first (scratch) coat and the second (brown) coat. The brown coat may be applied as soon as the scratch coat has reached sufficient hardness to support the weight of the additional plaster without causing damage to the scratch coat.

2512.8 Alternate method of application. The second coat is permitted to be applied as soon as the first coat has attained sufficient rigidity to receive the second coat.

While the majority of experts on the application of plaster generally agree that the first two coats of cement plaster should be cured as required by Section 2512.8.2, there is an increasingly large number who believe that the brown coat can be applied without requiring moist curing of the scratch coat, as long as the scratch coat has hardened to a condition of sufficient rigidity to accept the second coat. This alternative method of application is also considered by its proponents to be stronger than when the scratch coat has been cured as required by the code. This is because of a manufacturer's claim that a superior bond is produced between the two coats of plaster when the second coat is applied to a set, but uncured, coat.

2512.8.1 Admixtures. Where using this method of application, calcium aluminate cement up to 15 percent of the weight of the Portland cement is permitted to be added to the mix.

In order to develop a quicker set, the code permits the addition of calcium aluminate cement up to 15 percent of the weight of the Portland cement. These high-alumina cements are characterized by a faster set time than Portland cement. Because high-alumina cements do not possess the same high strength and qualities as Portland cement in plaster mixes, the code limits their proportion of the total mix.

2512.8.2 Curing. Curing of the first coat is permitted to be omitted and the second coat shall be cured as set forth in ASTM C926 and Table 2512.6.

When applied as specified in ASTM C926, the complete curing of the first (scratch) coat may be omitted. The second (brown) coat may be applied as soon as the scratch coat achieves sufficient rigidity; however, the second coat must be fully cured as indicated in Table 2512.6 prior to the application of the finish coat (for additional commentary on curing, see Section 2512.6).

2512.9 Finish coats. Cement plaster finish coats shall be applied over base coats that have been in place for the time periods set forth in ASTM C926. The third or finish coat shall be applied with sufficient material and pressure to bond and to cover the brown coat and shall be of sufficient thickness to conceal the brown coat.

===== Page 1809 =====
The base coats in plaster work provide the strength for the plaster membrane but generally do not provide a proper texture for a finished surface. Therefore, a thin, veneer-like coat of plaster or stucco is applied to the base coats as a finish coat. The finish coat can be applied as a textured, ornamental or decorative finish, or it can be applied as a smooth, flat surface appropriate to receive paint, wallpaper, applied textured finishes or a variety of architectural finishes. Finish plaster coats must be allowed to properly cure before applying any adhered or wet finishes.

## SECTION 2513 EXPOSED AGGREGATE
PLASTER

2513.1 General. Exposed natural or integrally colored aggregate is permitted to be partially embedded in a natural or colored bedding coat of cement plaster or gypsum plaster, subject to the provisions of this section.

This section is provided in the code to establish the requirements for the use of exposed aggregate cement plaster and gypsum plaster. Exposed aggregate plaster is approved by the code for both interior and exterior applications, although it is more commonly used with cement plaster as an exterior wall finish surface. The plaster systems, accessories, materials, assemblies, installation procedures and installation applications are essentially the same as other plastering systems with the exception of the bedding coat that is prepared to receive the exposed aggregate material.

Exposed aggregate plaster is a plaster finish, which as the name implies, has small chips of exposed aggregate embedded in its finish surface. Exposed aggregate finish is used most commonly on exterior cement plaster walls, although its use is not limited to exterior applications or cement plaster. Exposed aggregate finishes may also be applied to gypsum plaster, but like all other forms of gypsum plaster, it is limited to interior and nonwet areas. The purpose of using an exposed aggregate plaster is to provide a variety of textured and colored surfaces.

2513.2 Aggregate. The aggregate shall be applied manually or mechanically and shall consist of marble chips, pebbles or similar durable, moderately hard (three or more on the Mohs hardness scale), nonreactive materials.

Two of the more common exposed aggregate finishes are a washed pebble finish and a marble chip finish. There are other aggregates available, but the material requirements and application procedures are the same as those contained in this section. The mention of these two aggregates is not meant to exclude other materials from being acceptable.
The code requires that the materials used for the aggregate be nonreactive and moderately hard (three or harder on the Mohs hardness scale for minerals). The mineral that is used as the identifier for the hardness of three is calcite, which in its common form is represented by limestone and marble, to name only two. By requiring at least this hardness, the intent of the code is to approximate ordinary sand aggregate plaster in durability.

The aggregate is applied by rubbing or dashing it into or against the bedding coat and then using a trowel or other suitable tool to embed the aggregate firmly into the bedding coat. The aggregate often requires a light tamping to ensure the proper bedding.
2513.3 Bedding coat proportions. The bedding coat for interior or exterior surfaces shall be composed of one part Portland cement and one part Type S lime; or one part blended cement and one part Type S lime; or masonry cement; or plastic cement and a maximum of three parts of graded white or natural sand by volume. The bedding coat for interior surfaces shall be composed of 45 kg of neat gypsum plaster and a maximum of 90 kg of graded white sand. A factory-prepared bedding coat for interior or exterior use is permitted. The bedding coat for exterior surfaces shall have a minimum compressive strength of 6895 kPa.

The plaster mix proportions for the exposed aggregate bedding coat are to be as defined in this section.

For the same reason the code establishes the hardness requirements for the aggregate used in exposed aggregate plaster, it also establishes durability requirements for the bedding coat. The minimum compressive strength of the exterior bedding coat is to be 6895 kPa.

Type S lime is a special hydrated lime for masonry purposes, and is required in the exterior bedding coat to increase high early plasticity and water retention.

For the increased plasticity required of the bedding coat on an interior application, the code requires the use of a relatively richer gypsum plaster.

2513.4 Application. The bedding coat is permitted to be applied directly over the first (scratch) coat of plaster, provided the ultimate overall thickness is a minimum of 22 mm, including lath. Over concrete or masonry surfaces, the overall thickness shall be a minimum of 12.5 mm.

The requirements for the scratch coat used as part of the exposed aggregate plaster are the same as those for other scratch coats described and specified elsewhere in the code. The bedding coat may be used as the second

===== Page 1810 =====
coat, provided the total plaster thicknesses required in this section are maintained through the entire system.

2513.5 Bases. Exposed aggregate plaster is permitted to be applied over concrete, masonry, cement plaster base coats or gypsum plaster base coats installed in accordance with Section 2511 or 2512.

The requirements for the base coat used as part of the exposed aggregate plaster are the same as those for other base coats described and specified elsewhere in the code.

2513.6 Preparation of masonry and concrete. Masonry and concrete surfaces shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of Section 2510.7.

See the commentary for Section 2510.7 for the preparation of masonry and concrete.

2513.7 Curing of base coats. Cement plaster base coats shall be cured in accordance with ASTM C926. Cement plaster bedding coats shall retain sufficient moisture for hydration (hardening) for 24 hours minimum or, where necessary, shall be kept damp for 24 hours by light water spraying.

The curing requirements for cement plaster base coats are required to be the same as that shown in Table 2512.6 and as described in the related commentary, except that moist curing is only necessary for 24 hours in lieu of the 48 hours shown in Table 2512.6.

## SECTION 2514 REINFORCED GYPSUM CONCRETE

2514.1 General. Reinforced gypsum concrete shall comply with the requirements of ASTM C317 and ASTM C956.

The provisions of Section 2514 apply to poured-in-place reinforced gypsum concrete that is used to construct structural roof decks (when placed over permanent formboards). Gypsum concrete is a manufactured product consisting of calcined gypsum to which the producer may add aggregates complying with ASTM C35, wood chips or wood shavings. Only water is added at the job site.

Similar proprietary products manufactured under various trade names are intended to be used in nonstructural applications such as floor toppings, where increased sound resistance is desired. These products can also be used as floor levers, and this application is prevalent in rehabilitation of existing structures. This section is not intended to govern the use of these materials where used in nonstructural applications.

Gypsum concrete (the product) used in reinforced gypsum concrete construction must conform to the requirements of ASTM C317. This standard provides for two classes, A and B, of gypsum concrete based on minimum compressive strength. Class A must achieve a minimum compressive strength of 3.5 MPa and have a density not exceeding 960 kg per m \( ^{3} \) . Class B must achieve a compressive strength of 6.9 MPa with no restriction on density. Before the development of newer insulating materials suitable for installation on roof decks, reinforced gypsum concrete roof decks were used where energy efficiency was a concern. To increase the energy efficiency of the material, an aggregate complying with ASTM C35, such as perlite or vermiculite, is used to reduce the density of the gypsum concrete, thus increasing its R-value.

The design and installation of reinforced gypsum concrete roof decks must comply with the requirements of ASTM C956. Gypsum concrete roof decks must be reinforced with zinc-coated (galvanized) welded or woven wire mesh or fabric and must be designed to support anticipated loads without exceeding the allowable stresses specified in Appendix Section X2 of ASTM C956. ASTM C956 indicates that "methods of design (of reinforced gypsum concrete) shall follow established principles of mechanics and principles of design for reinforced concrete in accordance with SBC 304." Requirements of SBC 304 for shrinkage and temperature reinforcement in reinforced concrete do not apply to reinforced gypsum concrete.

2514.2 Minimum thickness. The minimum thickness of reinforced gypsum concrete shall be 50 mm except the minimum required thickness shall be reduced to 40 mm, provided the following conditions are satisfied:

1 The overall thickness, including the formboard, is not less than 50 mm.

2 The clear span of the gypsum concrete between supports does not exceed 800 mm.

3 Diaphragm action is not required.

4 The design live load does not exceed 2000 Pa.

This section provides an exception to the ASTM C956 minimum 50 mm-thickness requirement for reinforced gypsum concrete roof decks. The design live load mentioned in Item 4 should be interpreted to mean the larger of the design roof live load.

===== Page 1811 =====
## Bibliography

The following resource materials were used in the preparation of the commentary for this chapter of the code:

1 ASCE 7-10, Minimum Design Loads for Building's and Other Structures, with Supplement No. 1. New York: American Society of Civil Engineers, 2010.

2 ASTM C317/C317M-00 (2010), Specification for Gypsum Concrete. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2010.

3 ASTM C635/C635M-13, Specification for the Manufacture, Performance, and Testing of Metal Suspension Systems for Acoustical Tile and Lay-in Panel Ceilings. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2013.

4 ASTM C926-13, Specification for Application of Portland Cement-Based Plaster. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2013.

5 ASTM C956-04(2010), Specification for Installation of Cast-in-Place Reinforced Gypsum Concrete. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2010.

6 ASTM C 1063-12D, Specification for Installation of Lathing and Furring to Receive Interior and Exterior Portland Cement-based Plaster. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2012.

7 GA 216-13, Application and Finishing of Gypsum Panel Products. Hyatteville, MD: Gypsum Association, 2013.

===== Page 1812 =====
## TABLES AND FIGURES OF CHAPTER 25

TABLE 2506.2

GYPSUM BOARD AND GYPSUM PANEL PRODUCTS MATERIALS AND ACCESSORIES

<table>MATERIALSTANDARDAccessories for gypsum boardASTM C1047Adhesives for fastening gypsum boardASTM C557Expandable foam adhesives for fastening gypsum wallboardASTM D6464Cold-formed steel studs and track, structuralAISI S240Cold-formed steel studs and track, nonstructuralAISI S220Elastomeric joint sealantsASTM C920Expandable foam adhesives for fastening gypsum wallboardASTM D6464Factory-laminated gypsum panel productsASTM C1766Factory-laminated gypsum panel productsASTM C 1766Fiber-reinforced gypsum panelsASTM C 1278Glass mat gypsum backing panelASTM C 1178Glass mat gypsum panel 5ASTM C1658Glass mat gypsum substrateASTM C 1177Joint reinforcing tape and compoundASTM C 474; C 475Nails for gypsum boardsASTM C 514, F 547, F 1667Steel screwsASTM C 954; C 1002Standard specification for gypsum boardASTM C 1396Testing gypsum and gypsum productsASTM C 22; C 472; C 473</table>

TABLE 2507.2

LATH, PLASTERING MATERIALS AND ACCESSORIES

<table>MATERIALSTANDARDAccessories for gypsum veneer baseASTM C1047Blended cementASTM C 595Cold-formed steel studs and track, structuralAISI S240Cold-formed steel studs and track, nonstructuralAISI S220Exterior plaster bonding compoundsASTM C 932Hydraulic cementASTM C1157; C1600Gypsum casting and molding plasterASTM C 59Gypsum Keene&#x27;s cementASTM C 61Gypsum base for veneer plastersASTM C 588Gypsum plasterASTM C 28Gypsum veneer plasterASTM C 587Interior bonding compounds, gypsumASTM C 631Lime plastersASTM C 5; C 206Masonry cementASTM C 91Metal lathASTM C 847Plaster aggregatesSandASTM C 35; C 897PerliteASTM C 35VermiculiteASTM C 35Plastic cementASTM C 1328Portland cementASTM C 150Steel screwsASTM C 1002; C 954Welded wire lathASTM C 933Woven wire plaster baseASTM C 1032</table>

===== Page 1813 =====
TABLE 2508.1

INSTALLATION OF GYPSUM CONSTRUCTION

<table>MATERIALSTANDARDGypsum sheathing and gypsum panel productsASTM C 1280Gypsum veneer baseASTM C 844Gypsum board and gypsum panel productsGA-216; ASTM C 840Interior lathing and furringASTM C 841Steel framing for gypsum boards and gypsum panel productsASTM C 754; C 1007</table>

TABLE 2508.6

SHEAR CAPACITY FOR HORIZONTAL WOOD FRAMED GYPSUM BOARD DIAPHRAGM
CEILING ASSEMBLIES

<table>MATERIALTHICKNESS OF MATERIAL (MINIMUM) (mm)SPACING OF FRAMING MEMBERS (MAXIMUM) (mm)SHEAR VALUE a,b (N/m of ceiling)MIMMUM FASTENER SIZE (mm)Gypsum board or gypsum panel products12.5400 o.c.13005d cooler or wallboard nail; 40mm long; 2mm shank; -6 mm head cGypsum board or gypsum panel products12.5600 o.c.10005d cooler or wallboard nail; 40mm long; 2mm shank; 6 mm head c</table>

a. Values are not cumulative with other horizontal diaphragm values and are for short-term loading due to wind or seismic loading. Values shall be reduced 25 percent for normal loading.

b. Values shall be reduced 50 percent in Seismic Categories D, E and F.

c. No. 6 Type S or W screws are permitted to be substituted for the listed nails.

TABLE 2509.2

BACKERBOARD MATERIALS

<table>MATERIALSTANDARDGlass mat gypsum backing panelASTM C1178Nonasbestos fiber-cement backer boardASTM C1288 or ISO 8336, Category CNonasbestos fiber-mat reinforced cementitious backer unitASTM C1325</table>

TABLE 2511.1.1

INSTALLATION OF PLASTER CONSTRUCTION

<table>MATERIALSTANDARDGypsum plasterASTM C 842Gypsum veneer plasterASTM C 843Interior lathing and furring (gypsum plaster)ASTM C 841Lathing and furring (cement plaster)ASTM C 1063Portland cement plasterASTM C 926Steel framingASTM C 754; C 1007</table>

===== Page 1814 =====
TABLE 2512.6

CEMENT PLASTERS

<table>COATMINIMUM PERIOD MOIST CURINGMINIMUM INTERVAL BETWEEN COATSFirst48 hours a48 hours bSecond48 hours7 days cFinish—Note c</table>

a. The first two coats shall be as required for the first coats of exterior plaster, except that the moist-curing time period between the first and second coats shall not be less than 24 hours. Moist curing shall not be required where job and weather conditions are favorable to the retention of moisture in the cement plaster for the required time period.

b. Twenty-four-hour minimum interval between coats of interior cement plaster. For alternate method of application, see Section 2512.8.

c. Finish coat plaster is permitted to be applied to interior Portland cement base coats after a 48-hour period.

FIGURE 2504.1.2(1)

STUDLESS PLASTER PARTITION WITH GYPSUM BOARD LATH

===== Page 1815 =====
FIGURE 2504.1.2(2)
STUDLESS PLASTER PARTITION WITH RIBBED METAL LATH

===== Page 1816 =====
FIGURE 2508.6(1)
HORIZONTAL GYPSUM BOARD CEILING DIAPHRAGM CONSTRUCTION

FIGURE 2508.6(2)

PARTITION SUPPORTED LATERALLY BY GYPSUM BOARD CEILING DIAPHRAGM

===== Page 1817 =====
FIGURE 2508.6.3
PERIMETER BLOCKING

FIGURE 2510.5
THREE-COAT PLASTER ON UNSHEATHED EXTERIOR STUD WALL

===== Page 1818 =====
FIGURE 2511.1(1)
THREE-COAT PLASTER ON INTERIOR STUD WALL

===== Page 1819 =====
FIGURE 2512.1
THREE-COAT PLASTER ON EXTERIOR STUD WALL

FIGURE 2512.1.2

WEEP SCREED FOR EXTERIOR PLASTER ON STUD WALL AT SLAB ON GRADE

===== Page 1820 =====
This page left intentionally blank

