===== Page 0529 =====
# CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

## General Comments

Chapter 7 provides detailed requirements for fire resistance-rated construction, including structural members, walls, partitions and horizontal assemblies. Other portions of the code tell us when certain fire-resistance-rated elements are required. This chapter specifies how these elements are constructed, how openings in walls and partitions are protected, and how penetrations of such elements are protected.

Fire-resistance-rated construction is one form of fire protection in building design. It is often referred to as “passive protection.” Fire-resistance-rated building elements provide resistance to the advance of fire, as opposed to active fire protection systems, such as automatic sprinkler systems, which actively attempt to suppress a fire.

At the core of fire-resistance-rated construction is test standard ASTM E119. This test standard specifies how to test different building elements for fire resistance and defines what the level of fire-resistance performance is, based upon this test.

Restriction of fire growth, or passive protection, has been a key part of building codes since their inception. Other sections of the code require elements to have a fire-resistance rating or a degree of resistance to flame spread because of the relative hazard associated with the type of construction, the occupancy of the building or the function of the element.

The construction features dealt with in this chapter that are required to have some degree of fire resistance include structural members (Section 704), exterior walls (Section 705), fire walls (Section 706), fire barriers (Section 707), fire partitions (Section 708), smoke barriers (Section 709), smoke partitions (Section 710), horizontal assemblies (Section 711), vertical openings (Section 712) and shaft enclosures (Section 713). Additionally, methods of protecting penetrations, joints, doors, windows, ducts and air transfer openings in fire-resistant elements are covered in Sections 714, 715, 716 and 717. This chapter also covers draft stopping and fire blocking of concealed spaces, in Section 718. The flame spread and smoke development of insulation are regulated by Section 720.

As an alternative to tested assemblies, some prescriptive and calculated methods of determining fire-resistant assemblies are given in Sections 721 and 722.

## SECTION 701 GENERAL

701.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the materials, systems and assemblies used for structural fire resistance and fire-resistance-rated construction separation of adjacent spaces to safeguard against the spread of fire and smoke within a building and the spread of fire to or from buildings.

The provisions of Chapter 7 apply to the materials, assemblies and systems used to protect against the passage of fire and smoke. Each of the walls and partitions outlined herein provides various degrees of protection. The required fire-resistance rating varies with the potential fire hazard associated with the type of construction, occupancy, height and area of the building and degree of protection for different elements of the means of egress. The potential fire hazard associated with various occupancies is reflected in Table 508.4, Table 509.1, Table 706.4, Table 707.3.10 and 1020.1.

Chapter 7 provides the details and the extent of the protection (horizontal and vertical continuity); however, the actual fire-resistance-rated construction is mandated by provisions in Chapter 4, 5, 6, 7 and 10. Whenever the code mandates the use of materials or assemblies that are noncombustible or have a degree of fire or smoke resistance, the performance of the material or assembly is required to be evaluated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the referenced standards.

The important criteria for the terms “combustible” and “noncombustible” used in this chapter and elsewhere throughout the

## SECTION 702 MULTIPLE USE FIRE ASSEMBLIES.

702.1 Multiple use fire assemblies Fire assemblies that serve multiple purposes in a building shall comply with all of the requirements that are applicable for each of the individual fire assemblies.

Some building elements are required by two or more code provisions to be fire-resistance rated. The same wall can serve as a load-bearing wall in Type IIA construction, an incidental use separation wall and a corridor wall. The structural load-bearing wall must

===== Page 0530 =====
meet Section 704.1, the incidental use separation wall is a fire barrier and must meet Section 707, while the corridor wall is a fire partition and must meet Section 708. Another example would be an elevator lobby with an adjacent enclosed exit stair open to a corridor system that is required to be fire-resistance rated. In this example, the elevator shaft enclosure door opening, and the exit stairway door opening would need to not only comply with the requirements for openings in a fire barrier, but additionally must meet the smoke and draft control requirements for an opening in a fire-resistance-rated corridor.

## SECTION 703 FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS AND FIRE TESTS

703.1 Scope. Materials prescribed herein for fire resistance shall conform to the requirements of this chapter.

Standard fire test methods for determining fire-resistance ratings and combustibility of materials are covered in this section. Section 703.2 addresses determining the fire-resistance ratings of building assemblies and structural elements using testing, analytical methods or approved alternative methods. Section 703.3 defines methods to determine if a material is combustible or noncombustible. Section 703.4 references the testing and labeling requirements for fire-resistance-rated glazing. The identification requirements for various fire-resistance-rated walls and partitions are in Section 703.5.

Fire-resistance ratings of structural members are among the factors taken into consideration when determining the allowable height and area of buildings. By using materials and construction methods that result in the required fire-resistance ratings (see commentary, Table 504.3, Table 504.4 and Table 506.2), the inherent fire hazards associated with different uses are, in part, addressed. Other Sections of the code also contain provisions for required fire-resistance ratings in specific applications based on the need to separate uses, processes, fire areas or building areas.

703.2 Fire-resistance. The fire-resistance rating of building elements, components or assemblies shall be determined in accordance with Section 703.2.1 or 703.2.2 without the use of automatic sprinklers or any other fire suppression system being incorporated, or in accordance with Section 703.2.3.

This Section provides a clear path for determining fire resistance ratings. The path options are found in Section 703.2.1 or 703.2.2. Sprinklers are not part of the test in either Section 703.2.1 nor 703.2.2. The ratings are achieved by testing the materials and assemblies alone. The third path option is the alternative method as outlined in Section 703.2.3.

703.2.1 Tested assemblies. A fire-resistance rating of building elements, components or assemblies shall be determined by the test procedures set forth in ASTM E119 or UL 263. The fire-resistance rating of penetrations and fire-resistant joint systems shall be determined in accordance with Sections 714 and 715, respectively.

The fire-resistance ratings of building assemblies and structural elements could be determined in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263. The ASTM E119 and UL 263 test methods evaluate the ability of an assembly to contain a fire, to retain its structural integrity or both in terms of endurance time during the test conditions. The test standard also contains conditions for measuring heat transfer through membrane elements protecting framing or surfaces. The fire exposure is based on the standard time-temperature curve (see Commentary Figure 703.2.1). In addition, the data to indicate compliance with the requirements of Sections 714 and 715 for penetrations and joints must be submitted to verify that the required fire-resistance ratings are maintained. These Sections give prescriptive and performance compliance criteria for penetrations and openings within or through fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The details of the penetrations and openings within the tested assembly must meet these minimum requirements.

## 703.2.1.1 Nonsymmetrical wall

construction. Interior walls and partitions of nonsymmetrical construction shall be tested with both faces exposed to the furnace, and the assigned fire-resistance rating shall be the shortest duration obtained from the two tests conducted in compliance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263. Where evidence is furnished to show that the wall was tested with the least fire-resistant side exposed to the furnace, subject to acceptance of the building official, the wall need not be subjected to tests from the opposite side (see Section 705.5 for exterior walls).

In applying this Section and Section 703.2, it is the intent of the code that the required fire-resistance rating of interior walls be based on a fire exposure from either side. For example, it is appropriate to expect the required fire performance of an exit access corridor wall from the corridor side, as well as from the room side. If the corridor becomes involved in a fire, the corridor wall must restrict the spread of fire into adjacent spaces. However, Section 705.5 does allow exterior walls with a fire separation

===== Page 0531 =====
distance of more than 3 m to be fire-resistance rated from the interior only.

This Section permits testing from only one side of nonsymmetrical assemblies, provided it can be demonstrated that the tested side results in the lower value (i.e., the non-tested side, if tested, would result in a higher value). For example, a 50 mm by 100 mm wood stud wall with two layers of 16 mm Type X gypsum board on one side and only one layer on the opposite side is an illustration of a "nonsymmetrical" assembly. This assembly would be permitted to be tested only from the side with the single layer of gypsum board. This is because testing from the side with the two layers would result in a higher rating.

703.2.1.2 Combustible components. Combustible aggregates are permitted in gypsum and Portland cement concrete mixtures for fire-resistance-rated construction. Any component material or admixture is permitted in assemblies if the resulting tested assembly meets the fire-resistance test requirements of this code.

The combustibility of materials is regulated by the code when it has been determined that the material or assembly could significantly contribute to a fire hazard. However, the limited use of combustible materials, such as combustible aggregates, is permitted as long as the desired fire-resistance rating can still be obtained. The use of a combustible aggregate in the material or assembly will not significantly contribute to fire growth or severity.

703.2.1.3 Restrained classification. Fire-resistance-rated assemblies tested under ASTM E 119 or UL 263 shall not be considered to be restrained unless evidence satisfactory to the building official is furnished by the registered design professional showing that the construction qualifies for a restrained classification in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263. Restrained construction shall be identified on the construction documents.

The effect on the fire-resistance rating of a structural element that is part of an assembly is addressed, to an extent, through the distinction in ASTM E119 or UL 263 between “restrained” and “unrestrained” conditions. The standard defines this distinction as follows: “A restrained condition in fire tests, as used in this test method, is one in which expansion of the supports of a load-carrying element resulting from the effects of the fire is resisted by forces external to the element. An unrestrained condition is one in which the load-carrying element is free to expand and rotate at its supports.” In evaluating fire-resistance ratings of structural elements, the conditions of support must be consistent with the tested condition as described in the test report.

A restrained classification yields higher fire-resistance ratings than unrestrained; therefore, the code takes the conservative approach, and thus the lesser rating, by assuming the in-place conditions to be unrestrained unless structural documentation is provided that supports a restrained condition.

Supplemental features. Where materials, systems or devices that have not been tested as part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly are incorporated into the building element, component or assembly, sufficient data shall be made available to the building official to show that the required fire-resistance rating is not reduced.

The extent to which the test specimen is representative of in place conditions is determined by the test standard and what is actually tested. For example, the test standard does not provide for the effect on fire endurance of conventional openings in the assembly, such as electrical outlets, plumbing pipes, etc., unless specifically included in the construction assembly tested. The test reports will, however, typically indicate an allowance for openings for steel electrical outlet boxes that do not exceed 0.01 m² in area, provided that the area of such openings does not exceed 0.065 m² for any 9 m² of wall area. Since, in actuality, assemblies are often penetrated by cables, conduits, ducts, pipes, vents and similar materials, such penetrations that are not part of the tested assembly must be adequately protected and sealed for the assembly to perform as required in resisting the spread of fire. This section, therefore, also mandates that adequate documentation be submitted in order for the building official to verify that the fire-resistance rating of the assembly is not compromised by the penetration. The documentation submitted as evidence that the required fire-resistance ratings are not reduced can be in the form of specific product, assembly or system listings (see the definition of "Listed" in Chapter 2), engineering judgments provided by accredited testing laboratories, product manufacturers that are based on similar tested conditions or, less frequently, data reports for specific fire tests conducted to evaluate a specific penetration method. However, care must be taken to determine that the materials and methods of the proposed penetration or joint protection correspond to the details of the actual penetration or joint protection assembly that was tested.

ASTM E119 and UL 263 state that they are not intended to determine the following:

===== Page 0532 =====
• Contribution of the tested assembly to the fire hazard.

• Measurement of the degree of control or limitation of the passage of smoke or products of combustion.

• Simulation of the fire behavior at joints between building elements, such as floor-to-wall or wall-to-wall connections; or

• Measurement of the flame spread over the surface of the tested element.

Documentation that a component or assembly has been tested to ASTM E119 or UL 263 is typically in the form of a test report issued by an approved, qualified testing agency. The test report contains certain information, including the time periods of fire resistance (e.g., 1 hour, 1½ hours, 2 hours, etc.) and other significant details of the material or assembly. In lieu of an actual copy of a test report, the building official may accept the use of a design number found in a compendium of ASTM E119 or UL 263 test reports such as, but not limited to, the Fire Resistance Design Manual published by the Gypsum Association, the Fire Resistance Directory published by UL LLC, or certification listings published by Warnock Hersey. Each publication includes a detailed description of the assembly, its hourly fire-resistance rating and other pertinent details, such as specifications of materials and alternative assembly details.

These publications detail the design of columns, beams, walls, partitions and floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling assemblies that have been tested or analyzed in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263. The designs are classified in accordance with their use and fire-resistance rating. Often, wall, partition, floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling assemblies are further classified with sound transmission class (STC) ratings. Many floor/ceiling assemblies also include impact insulation class (IIC) ratings. The designs indicate whether an assembly was tested under load-bearing or non-load-bearing conditions, and what structural height limitations there are for non-load-bearing assemblies. Many of the publications have introductory material that provides details on the uses and limitations of the tested assemblies, such as the amount of penetrations permitted in an assembly for electrical outlet boxes.

703.2.1.5 Exterior bearing walls. In determining the fire-resistance rating of exterior bearing walls, compliance with the ASTM E 119 or UL 263 criteria for unexposed surface temperature rise and ignition of cotton waste due to passage of flame or gases is required only for a period of time corresponding to the required fire-resistance rating of an exterior nonbearing wall with the same fire separation distance, and in a building of the same group. Where the fire-resistance rating determined in accordance with this exception exceeds the fire-resistance rating determined in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263, the fire exposure time period, water pressure and application duration criteria for the hose stream test of ASTM E 119 or UL 263 shall be based on the fire-resistance rating determined in accordance with this section.

This section applies to exterior load-bearing walls that are required to have a fire-resistance rating for structural integrity and not as a fire barrier (e.g., due to fire separation distance in accordance with Table 705.5). The exception is necessary because ASTM E119 and UL 263 do not distinguish between structural and fire-contamination features of a wall. For example, assume that a concrete double-tee wall assembly was tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263. The flanges of the double-tees were 40 mm thick (and the load applied to the wall was 140 kN/m. Because the temperature of the unexposed surface rose an average of 121°C in 21 minutes, the fire-resistance rating assigned to the assembly was 21 minutes. The fire exposure was continued after the unexposed surface temperature criterion was exceeded and the wall assembly continued to support the applied load for 2 hours, at which time the test was terminated. Thus, the wall should be acceptable where structural performance for 2 hours is required, and prevention of fire spread from building to building is not under consideration because of the fire separation distance. The exception, therefore, allows exterior load-bearing walls to be tested after the first failure criterion of ASTM E119 or UL 263 is reached, if the failure is other than a failure to sustain the applied load, and allows a structural fire-resistance rating to be determined. It should be noted that the hose stream test procedure is to be based on the fire exposure time period related to the structural fire-resistance rating.

703.2.2 Analytical methods. The fire resistance of building elements, components or assemblies established by an analytical method shall be by any of the methods listed in this section, based on the fire exposure and acceptance criteria specified in ASTM E119 or UL 263:

1 Fire-resistance designs documented in approved sources.

2 Prescriptive designs of fire-resistance-rated building elements, components or assemblies as prescribed in Section 721.

3 Calculations in accordance with Section 722.

===== Page 0533 =====
4 Engineering analysis based on a comparison of building element, component or assemblies designs having fire-resistance ratings as determined by the test procedures set forth in ASTM E 119 or UL 263.

5 Fire-resistance designs certified by an approved agency.

When based on the fire exposure and acceptance criteria of ASTM E119 or UL 263, an analytical method can be used in lieu of an actual ASTM E119 or UL 263 fire test to establish the fire-resistance rating of a single component or assembly.

The commentary to Section 703.2 also identifies additional resource materials relative to test reports.

2 & 3. Sections 721 and 722 provide further methods of determining fire-resistance ratings (see the commentary to these sections).

For example, methods for determining fire-resistance ratings of concrete or masonry assemblies have been standardized in ACI 216.1/TMS 0216 (see commentary, Section 722.1), as well as in the following:

• PCI MNL 124, Precast/Prestressed Concrete Institute.

• Reinforced Concrete Fire Resistance, Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute.

• CMIFC SR267.01B, Concrete and Masonry Industry Fire Safety Committee.

• A Compilation of Fire Tests on Concrete Masonry Assemblies, National Concrete Masonry Association.

• NCMA TEK 6A, National Concrete Masonry Association.

• NCMA 35D, National Concrete Masonry Association.

4 An approved engineering analysis allows the fire protection properties of a component or assembly to be determined using information generated from previous fire tests through empirical calculations. There are several analytical methods available to designers for many types of construction materials. An engineering analysis is available for calculating fire-resistance ratings of heavy timber construction. This analysis uses an empirical mathematical method that generates a design for the minimum dimensions of a wood beam or column. These dimensions account for the changes that occur in the member due to charring of the wood after any given period of fire exposure. American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI) Designing Fire Protection for Steel Columns presents the factors that influence the fire-resistance ratings of steel columns in frequently used sizes and shapes. The publication also contains a discussion of the fire protection materials most often used with steel columns and provides accepted methods for calculating the fire-resistance rating of steel columns predicated on the ASTM E119 or UL 263 fire exposure standard. Similarly, AISI's Designing Fire Protection for Steel Beams presents the factors that influence the fire-resistance ratings of steel beams in frequently used sizes. As typical test reports specify minimum beam sizes only, three different ways of evaluating beam substitutions are provided. Since the ASTM E119 or UL 263 test furnace is incapable of testing assemblies that incorporate large structural members, AISI's Designing Fire Protection for Steel Trusses proposes concepts for determining fire protection designs by applying existing test data. It is important to emphasize that all analytical methods of calculating fire-resistance ratings must be substantiated as being based on the fire exposure and acceptance criteria of ASTM E119 or UL 263. Upon submission of such documentation to the building official, the analytical methods mentioned herein, or any other such analytical methods, can be approved as the basis for showing compliance with the fire-resistance ratings required by the code.

5 This item allows the determination of fire-resistance design by qualified agencies. The term “certified by an approved agency” provides confidence that the design conforms to the test standard based on scientific data.

703.2.3 Approved alternate method. The fire resistance of building elements, components or assemblies not complying with Section 703.2.1 or 703.2.2 shall be permitted to be established by an alternative protection method in accordance with Section 104.11.

Section 104.11 can be used to establish fire resistance for elements as an alternative to the fire testing and analytical methods contained in this code. Under Section 104.11, the building official is able to use testing that seems appropriate, which could include sprinklers as part of a test.

An example of an alternative protection method is the water-filled steel column system. The system consists of hollow, liquid-filled columns that are interconnected with pipe loops to allow the water to circulate freely. Engineering studies confirmed by tests have shown that critical temperatures are not reached in the

===== Page 0534 =====
steel columns as long as they remain filled with liquid.

703.3 Noncombustibility tests. The tests indicated in Section 703.3.1 shall serve as criteria for acceptance of building materials as set forth in Sections 602.2, 602.3 and 602.4 in Type I, II, III and IV constructions. The term “noncombustible” does not apply to the flame spread characteristics of interior finish or trim materials. A material shall not be classified as a noncombustible building construction material if it is subject to an increase in combustibility or flame spread beyond the limitations herein established through the effects of age, moisture or other atmospheric conditions.

Restrictions on the use of combustible materials are primarily found in Chapter 6. However, certain sections of Chapter 7 (such as use of combustibles in Section 703.2.1.2 and fire walls in Section 706.3) contain restrictions on the use of combustible materials and separate provisions, depending on whether the material is combustible or noncombustible. Sections 703.3.1 contain the appropriate test criteria by which a material is to be evaluated to ascertain whether it is combustible or noncombustible.

Materials that are considered noncombustible must be capable of maintaining the required performance characteristics (non-combustibility and flame spread ratings) regardless of age, moisture or other atmospheric conditions. If exposure to atmospheric conditions results in an increase in combustibility or flame spread rating beyond the limitations specified, the material is considered combustible.

The criteria established by this Section are primarily based on the National Board of Fire Underwriters' (NBFU) National Building Code, 1955 edition, which permitted a noncombustible material to contain a limited amount of combustible material, provided that it did not contribute to fire propagation. The requirement for noncombustibility is considered to apply to certain materials used for walls, roofs and other structural elements, but not to surface finish materials. The determination of whether a material is noncombustible from the standpoint of minimum required clearances to heating appliances, flues or other sources of high temperature is based on the ASTM E136 definition of "Noncombustibility."

703.3.1 Noncombustible materials. Materials required to be noncombustible shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E136. Alternately, materials required to be noncombustible shall be tested in accordance with ASTM E2652 using the acceptance criteria prescribed by ASTM E136.

Exception: Materials having a structural base of noncombustible material as determined in accordance with ASTM E136, or with ASTM E2652 using the acceptance criteria prescribed by ASTM E136, with a surfacing of not more than 3.18 mm in thickness having a flame spread index not greater than 50 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 shall be acceptable as noncombustible.

Materials intended to be classified as noncombustible are to be tested in accordance with ASTM E136. In accordance with Section 8 of ASTM E136, such materials are acceptable as noncombustible when at least three of four specimens tested conform to all of the following criteria:

The recorded temperature of the surface and interior thermocouples shall not at any time during the test rise more than  \( 12^{\circ} \) C above the furnace temperature at the beginning of the test.

There shall not be flaming from the specimen after the first 30 seconds.

If the weight loss of the specimen during testing exceeds 50 percent, the recorded temperature of the surface and interior thermocouples shall not at any time during the test rise above the furnace air temperature at the beginning of the test, and there shall not be flaming of the specimen.

The use of the test standard is limited to elementary materials and excludes laminated and coated materials because of the uncertainties associated with more complex materials and with products that cannot be tested in a realistic configuration. The test standard is also limited to solid materials and does not measure the self-heating tendencies of large masses of materials, such as resin impregnated mineral fiber insulation.

The defined furnace temperature in the standard,  \( 750^{\circ} \) C, is representative of temperatures that are known to exist during building fires, although temperatures between  \( 980^{\circ} \) C and  \( 1200^{\circ} \) C are frequently achieved during intense fires. For most building materials, however, complete burning of the combustible fraction will occur as readily at  \( 750^{\circ} \) C as at higher temperatures. The criterion requiring four specimens to be tested recognizes the variable nature of the measurements and the fact that there are difficulties in observing the presence and duration of flaming.

===== Page 0535 =====
The need to measure and limit the duration of flaming and the rise in temperature recognizes that a brief period of flaming and a small amount of heating are not considered serious limitations on the use of building materials. Test results have shown that such criteria limit the combustible portion of noncombustible materials to a maximum of 3 percent. The 50 percent weight-loss limitation precludes the possibility that combustion of low-density materials will occur so rapidly that the recorded temperature rise, and the measured flaming duration will be less than the prescribed limitations. The 50-percent limitation is considered appropriate for materials that contain appreciable quantities of combined water or gaseous components.

ASTM E2652—16 is titled Standard Test Method for Behavior of Materials in a Tube Furnace with a Cone-shaped Airflow Stabilizer at  \( 750^{\circ} \) C. This test method is similar to ASTM E136 but based on the international standard for non-combustibility. The key difference between the two standards is in the equipment. The furnace tube in this test method has a conical airflow stabilizer Section attached at its bottom while the tube in ASTM E136 does not. Both test methods use cylindrical furnace tubes. Neither standard includes mandatory pass/fail criterion. ASTM E2652 allows those criteria to be determined by the codes or other users. ASTM E136 has already been revised to include ASTM E2652 as an alternate methodology.

The exception recognizes that an essentially noncombustible material with a thin combustible coating will not contribute appreciably to an ambient fire. This Section provides criteria by which a composite material may be determined acceptable as a noncombustible material. The structural base of the composite material must meet the criteria for elementary materials (see Section 703.3.1). The material may have a surface not more than 3.2 mm thick applied to the noncombustible base. This surface is required to have a flame spread rating not greater than 50 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. For a discussion of both the ASTM E84 and UL 723 test methods, refer to the comment by Section 803.1.
703.4 Fire-resistance-rated glazing. Fire-resistance-rated glazing, when tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 and complying with the requirements of Section 707, shall be permitted. Fire-resistance-rated glazing shall bear a label marked in accordance with Table 716.1(1) issued by an agency and shall be permanently identified on the glazing.
Fire-resistance-rated glazing is one of two designated types of fire rated glazing fire-protection-rated glazing being the other. Fire-rated glazing is allowed in three separate locations, depending on which tests the glazing has passed. The label is required to provide the location and the fire-resistance rating in minutes. There are door labels, window labels and wall labels. Section 703.4 concerns only the fire-resistance-rated glazing. Table 716.1(1) indicates that glazing meeting ASTM E119 or UL 263 shall bear a "W" label and is considered a wall; therefore, it is not subject to the limitations on doors and windows. This section indicates that fire-resistance-rated glazing with the "W" designation on the label is good for fire walls and fire barriers. It follows that it would be good for shaft walls and stair enclosures as well. It could also be used as a fire partition, smoke partition or smoke barrier. Fire-resistance-rated glazing is also mentioned in Table 716.1(2) for doors and windows.

703.5 Marking and identification. Where there is an accessible concealed floor, floor-ceiling or attic space, fire walls, fire barriers, fire partitions, smoke barriers and smoke partitions or any other wall required to have protected openings or penetrations shall be effectively and permanently identified with signs or stenciling in the concealed space. Such identification shall:

1 Be located within 4.5 m of the end of each wall and at intervals not exceeding 9 m measured horizontally along the wall or partition.

2 Include lettering not less than 75 mm in height with a minimum 10 mm stroke in a contrasting color incorporating the suggested wording, "FIRE AND/OR SMOKE BARRIER—PROTECT ALL OPENINGS," or other wording.

This code requirement addresses the need for installed fire-resistance-rated assemblies to maintain their fire resistance over the life of the building. This identification will allow tradespeople, craftsmen, installers, maintenance workers or inspectors to know that the wall is a fire-resistance-rated wall and openings or penetrations of it must be protected. This identification is only required where there is an accessible concealed space associated with the wall construction.

703.6 Determination of noncombustible protection time contribution. The time, in minutes, contributed to the fire-resistance rating by the noncombustible protection of mass timber building elements, components, or assemblies, shall be established through a comparison of assemblies tested using procedures set forth in ASTM E119 or

===== Page 0536 =====
UL 263. The test assemblies shall be identical in construction, loading and materials, other than the noncombustible protection. The two test assemblies shall be tested to the same criteria of structural failure with the following conditions:

1 Test Assembly 1 shall be without protection.

2 Test Assembly 2 shall include the representative non-combustible protection. The protection shall be fully defined in terms of configuration details, attachment details, joint sealing details, accessories and all other relevant details.

The noncombustible protection time contribution shall be determined by subtracting the fire-resistance time, in minutes, of Test Assembly 1 from the fire-resistance time, in minutes, of Test Assembly 2.

This Section provides the method by which any material not contained in the prescriptive tables in Section 722.7 may be tested to show the time, in minutes, it contributes as noncombustible protection.

Noncombustible construction is noncombustible material meeting the requirements of Section 703.3. The contribution to the fire-resistance rating of any building element is determined in two parts: by measuring the fire-resistance time, in minutes and determined by structural failure, of a building element; and conducting a second test measuring the fire-resistance time, in minutes and determined by structural failure, of the identical element with identical load, construction and condition, but with the proposed noncombustible protection applied to it. The difference in time between the two samples is the contribution, in minutes, of the noncombustible protection.

Testing laboratories typically use structural collapse, deflection limits or rate of change of deflection as the criteria for structural failure. The noncombustible protection materials must meet the requirements of Section 703.3. Applicable noncombustible protection configuration details, attachment details, joint sealing (if utilized), and any other accessories and other relevant details must be recorded.

The procedure described in this Section provides a method for determining the time assigned to noncombustible protection for mass timber elements. This Section utilizes ASTM E119 or UL 263 as the test protocol to determine the added fire-resistance time, in minutes, to be assigned to the tested noncombustible protection. Noncombustible protection times listed in Table 722.7.1(1) are deemed to comply with this provision.
Testing by the American Wood Council following this procedure confirmed the times assigned by historic testing and is summarized in Sections 3.6 and 3.7 of its Technical Report 10 (2018 edition). This procedure should not be confused with the membrane protection requirements in ASTM E119 or UL 263, which are based on temperature rise on the unexposed side of a membrane attached to construction elements.

703.7 Sealing of adjacent mass timber elements. In buildings of Types IV-A, IV-B and IV-C construction, sealant or adhesive shall be provided to resist the passage of air in the following locations:

1 At abutting edges and intersections of mass timber building elements required to be fire-resistance rated.

2 At abutting intersections of mass timber building elements and building elements of other materials where both are required to be fire-resistance rated.

Sealants shall meet the requirements of ASTM C920. Adhesives shall meet the requirements of ASTM D3498.

Exception: Sealants or adhesives need not be provided where they are not a required component of a tested fire-resistance-rated assembly.

This Section addresses new construction Types IV-A, IV-B and IV-C. The requirement to provide sealants or adhesive at intersections of fire-resistance-rated mass timber elements addresses the potential for airflow to carry hot gases and other products of combustion into gaps at the connections between mass timber elements. Note that Section 1705.20 requires special inspection of sealants and adhesives. ASTM C920 provides specifications for elastomeric joint sealants and ASTM D3498 provides specifications for field-gluing plywood to lumber framing for floor systems.

Construction adhesive or other sealants can be used to prevent air flow. Where a wall or horizontal assembly serves as the separation between two atmospheres, a fire creates differential pressure where heated gases raise the pressure and work to drive fire and hot gases through the structure. Voids that are not properly sealed can serve as a conduit for air movement during a fire, so abutting edges and intersections are recommended to be sealed. Periodic special inspections during construction are required to ensure that the appropriate sealant or adhesive is used and to establish inspections to verify for ongoing quality control (see Section 1705).

===== Page 0537 =====
The exception is included so that any fire-resistance-rated mass timber assembly that has been tested to and passed ASTM E119 without such sealants or adhesive at mass timber element intersection will not be required to add any sealants or adhesive during design and construction.

## SECTION 704 FIRE-RESISTANCE
RATING OF STRUCTURAL MEMBERS

704.1 Requirements. The fire-resistance ratings of structural members and assemblies shall comply with this section and the requirements for the type of construction as specified in Table 601. The fire-resistance ratings shall be not less than the ratings required for the fire-resistance-rated assemblies supported by the structural members.

Exception: Fire barriers, fire partitions, smoke barriers and horizontal assemblies as provided in Sections 707.5, 708.4, 709.4 and 711.2, respectively.

This section contains provisions that apply to structural members that are required to have a fire-resistance rating. The required rating of structural members is usually based on the type of construction and Table 601. Other sections of the code, such as the continuity provisions of Sections 707.5, 709.4, 710.4 and 711.2.2, may require structural members to have a fire-resistance rating because they support fire-resistance-rated construction. The minimum required fire-resistance rating for the structural member is, therefore, the more restrictive of the above two criteria.

There are instances in which the code does not require the supporting structural members to have a fire-resistance rating. An example includes the supporting construction for tenant and sleeping unit separations, exit access corridors and smoke partitions in Type IIB, IIIB, and VB construction (see Sections 708.4 and 709.4).

Protection of structural members differs for various members. Required column fire-resistance protection must be afforded in accordance with Section 704.2. Certain primary structural frames (see definition in Chapter 2) must be protected by individual encasement in accordance with Section 704.3. Secondary structural members (see definition in Chapter 2) may utilize membrane protection in accordance with Section 704.4. Special requirements apply to fire-resistance protection of trusses (see Section 704.5).

Section 704 addresses issues such as protection of attachments to structural members (see Section 704.6), embedment of service facilities (see Section 704.8), impact protection (see Section 704.9), exterior structural members (see Section 704.10), bottom flange protection (see Section 704.11), seismic isolation systems (see Section 704.12) and sprayed fire-resistant materials (SFRM) (see Section 704.13).

704.2 Column protection. Where columns are required to have protection to achieve a fire-resistance rating, the entire column shall be provided individual encasement protection by protecting it on all sides for the full column height, including connections to other structural members, with materials having the required fire-resistance rating. Where the column extends through a ceiling, the encasement protection shall be continuous from the top of the foundation or floor/ceiling assembly below through the ceiling space to the top of the column.

Exception: Columns that meet the requirements of Section 704.4.1.

Columns required to be fire-resistance rated must be encased on all sides. This is true even if the column is located on the exterior of the structure. The ceiling membrane or ceiling protection of a floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling fire-resistance-rated assembly is prohibited from being considered as the protection for columns required to have a fire-resistance rating. Therefore, the materials that encase or provide individual protection must continue through the concealed space above a ceiling, even if the ceiling membrane is part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly (see Commentary Figure 704.2). Connections of structural members to columns must also be individually protected (see Section 704.6). Columns that provide inherent fire resistance, without encasement, such as heavy timber, are considered as not requiring protection and do not need to comply with this section.

The exception allows for built-up solid structural elements, such as two or more vertical framing members, within fire-resistance-rated walls of light-frame construction meeting the limitations of Section 704.4.1, to be a part of a fire-resistance-rated wall assembly without requiring the individual encasement protection of Section 704.2.

704.3 Protection of the primary structural frame other than columns. Members of the primary structural frame other than columns that are required to have protection to achieve a fire-resistance rating and support more than two floors or one floor and roof, or support a load-bearing wall or a nonload-bearing wall more than two stories high, shall be provided individual encasement protection by protecting them on all sides for the full length, including connections to other structural members, with materials having the required fire-resistance rating.

===== Page 0538 =====
Exception: Individual encasement protection on all sides shall be permitted on all exposed sides provided the extent of protection is in accordance with the required fire-resistance rating. as determined in Section 703.

Not all primary structural frames need to comply with this section. Only those primary structural frame members that are required to have a fire-resistance rating and support more than two floors, more than one floor and a roof, a bearing wall of any height or a non-load-bearing wall more than two stories high, are required to be protected by individual encasement. Individual encasement, though not defined, is attained by using tested design assemblies that provide gypsum board applied directly to the member or to studs that are directly attached to all sides of the member, mastic and intumescing coatings, and sprayed fire-resistant materials.

Individual encasement is required for primary structural frame members receiving tributary loads from multiple levels in order to reduce the risk associated with catastrophic failure. The risk represented by structural collapse during a fire is significantly increased in multistory buildings, since the occupants require additional time of egress and a single structural element that supports multiple elements requires more conservative protection methods.

Though the text states that the encasement must be on all sides of the structural member, the exception will allow tested assemblies that have the encasement on only the exposed sides of a member. Commentary Figure 704.3 is an example of individual encasement protection.

Note that some structural members such as heavy wood beams may not require any protection (encasement or membrane) to attain a fire rating (see calculated fire resistance, Section 722.1).

704.4 Protection of secondary structural members. Secondary structural members that are required to have protection to achieve a fire-resistance rating shall be protected by individual encasement protection.

Where secondary structural members are required to be fire-resistance-rated, the rating, in most cases, is required to be achieved by construction that encloses the individual member. See Commentary Figure 704.2 and Figure 704.3 for examples of individual encasement. Situations where the fire rating can be achieved by a membrane are contained in Sections 704.4.1 and 704.4.2.
Remember that the fire-resistance requirements are established based upon a fire test in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263. Although the fire temperature in the furnace is the same, the test protocols in both standards have different temperature rise limits for the elements and different temperature couple locations between a structural member test and a wall or horizontal assembly test. Therefore, although a wall may obtain a 1-hour fire-resistance rating, it does not mean that a column placed within that wall would also obtain a 1-hour fire-resistance rating. Also, a floor/ceiling assembly rated for 2 hours cannot be assumed to protect a beam that was not in the tested assembly. If the beam was in the tested assembly, the fire-resistance rating of the floor/ceiling may be different than the beam. It is important that the structural members located within the assemblies were also in the tested floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling assemblies.

704.4.1 Light-frame construction. Studs, columns, and boundary elements that are integral elements in walls of light-frame construction and are located entirely between the top and bottom plates or tracks construction shall be permitted to have required fire-resistance ratings provided by the membrane protection provided for the wall.

* Studs and columns in light-frame construction that are within the space defined by the top and bottom plate are considered as standard parts of the wall assembly rather than as individual members acting as a typical column. Other vertical elements would require individual encasement to achieve the required fire-resistance rating.

704.4.2 Horizontal assemblies. Horizontal assemblies are permitted to be protected with a membrane or ceiling where the membrane or ceiling provides the required fire-resistance rating and is installed in accordance with Section 711.

The fire-resistance rating of secondary members within a horizontal assembly can be achieved by either a ceiling membrane or by individual encasement. Typically, protection by a ceiling membrane is the most economical, though it depends on the details of the specific condition. Commentary Figure 704.4.2 is an example of membrane protection.

704.5 Truss protection. The required thickness and construction of fire-resistance-rated assemblies enclosing trusses shall be based on the results of full-scale tests or combinations of tests on truss components or on approved calculations based on such tests that satisfactorily demonstrate that the assembly has the required fire resistance.

===== Page 0539 =====
* Trusses can be of an almost infinite number of configurations and sizes. By nature, they are typically designed and constructed of different structural components. This leads to the impracticality of such trusses being tested. The code acknowledges this by allowing full-scale tests, tests on the individual components or some form of calculations that demonstrate that the structural elements that form the truss are provided with the requisite protection to attain the fire-resistance rating.

704.6 Attachments to structural members. The edges of lugs, brackets, rivets and bolt heads attached to structural members shall be permitted to extend to within 25 mm of the surface of the fire protection.

This section is intended to limit the transfer of heat to the structural element from the connection elements by requiring the connection element to be protected with at least 25 mm of some form of fire-resistance protection. No attaching elements are allowed to the structural element that would allow heat to transfer through the protection and to the structural element. At least 25 mm of cover is required on all the attaching elements.

704.6.1 704.6.1 Secondary attachments to structural members. Where primary and secondary structural steel members require fire protection, secondary steel attachments to those structural members shall be protected with the same fire-resistive material and thickness as required for the structural member. The protection shall extend away from the structural member a distance of not less than 300 mm or shall be applied to the entire length where the attachment is less than 300 mm long. Where an attachment is hollow and the ends are open, the fire-resistive material and thickness shall be applied to both exterior and interior of the hollow steel attachment.

The minimum required fire-resistance ratings of primary and secondary structural steel members are contained in Table 601. Secondary (nonstructural) steel attachments to those structural members are required to be protected with the same fire-resistive material and thickness required for the structural member, in accordance with the provisions of this section.

Building attachments for miscellaneous nonstructural items (hangers, braces, framing tracks, erection lifting lugs, wall supports, etc.) are typically not required to be individually fire protected. In addition, fire-resistance-rated assemblies are tested without attachments, and with a homogeneous and continuous protection system or material. Thus, rated assemblies are explicitly limited to only the tested or approved components given in the published listing, which does not include bare steel attachments or discontinuous member protection. If such secondary steel attachments are connected to a fire-resistance-rated steel assembly, they may jeopardize the assembly's rating and protection system by the introduction of "thermal shorts," which can cause unexpected and excessive heat conduction, convection, or radiation through the attachment or its connection to the primary assembly. To address these concerns, this Section requires a minimum 300 mm extension of fireproofing on all nonstructural attachments.

In cases where a hollow attachment with open ends is utilized, it is vital that the interior surfaces of the element are fireproofed, and the bottom ends are closed. Without this protection, bare (unprotected) steel areas at the attachment could be directly exposed to radiant and convective heat from a fire source.

704.7 Reinforcing. Thickness of protection for concrete or masonry reinforcement shall be measured to the outside of the reinforcement except that stirrups and spiral reinforcement ties are permitted to project not more than 12.5 mm into the protection.

Since load-bearing assemblies must sustain the superimposed load while being subjected to standard time-temperature fire conditions, concrete, masonry and reinforcing steel must be able to provide the required strength at elevated temperatures. This involves providing adequate cover over the steel reinforcement so that the stress induced in the reinforcement is less than its yield stress, which is commonly referred to as "yield strength." Tests of steel reinforcing bars show that at a temperature of approximately  \( 590^{\circ} \) C, the yield strength of steel is reduced to approximately 50 percent of that at ambient temperature conditions. Similar tests of pre-stressing tendons show that at approximately  \( 425^{\circ} \) C the tensile strength is approximately 50 percent of that at ambient conditions. Cover requirements, therefore, are typically based on limiting the reinforcing and pre-stressing steel temperatures to 590 and  \( 425^{\circ} \) C, respectively. This section allows for stirrups and spiral column ties to project into the required cover by a minimal distance, acknowledging the practicality of construction tolerances while providing adequate cover to the main reinforcing steel, which is located inside of the stirrups and ties. This also acknowledges that the stirrups are not continuous for the length of the member and are spaced at intermittent intervals. Therefore, they only reduce the actual cover to the main reinforcing steel at a percentage of its length.

===== Page 0540 =====
The 12.5 mm dimension reflects a dia 12.5 mm reinforcing bar.

704.8 Embedments and enclosures. Pipes, wires, conduits, ducts or other service facilities shall not be embedded in the required fire protective covering of a structural member that is required to be individually encased.

Piping, wires, conduits, ducts and other service facilities are not to be embedded in the fire protective covering of a structural member that is required to be individually encased in accordance with Section 704.3. The fire protection performance of encasement materials is critical to achieve the required fire-resistance rating and would be impaired if the continuity of the encasement is interrupted. This does not, however, prevent the installation if these items are installed in hollow spaces that may be created by the encasement method. When items are installed in such hollow spaces, penetrations of the protective assembly must be properly protected so that the fire-resistance rating is maintained.

704.9 Impact protection. Where the fire protective covering of a structural member is subject to impact damage from moving vehicles, the handling of merchandise or other activity, the fire protective covering shall be protected by corner guards or by a substantial jacket of metal or other noncombustible material to a height adequate to provide full protection, but not less than 1.5 m from the finished floor.

Exception: Corner protection is not required on concrete columns in parking garages.

To aid in the reliability of the fire protective covering, impact protection must be provided if the covering is subject to impact from moving vehicles, handling of merchandise or other activities. The impact protection is to be provided to at least 1.5 m above the finished floor or as needed to prevent impact damage. The type of protection required is not specified within the code, but it should be determined based on the type of fire protection used and also the expected impact that the protection may be expected to encounter. For example, if the fire-resistance protection of a column is provided by either spray on fireproofing or gypsum board, that would be more likely to be damaged than a concrete-encased column. Additionally, if the column was in a grocery store and the only expected item to impact the column was a shopping cart, then it may be determined acceptable to simply cover the gypsum board with a piece of thin sheet metal. On the other hand, if the column is located in a warehouse or parking garage where a vehicle such as a forklift or automobile could strike it, then the protection may require the installation of steel plates or bollards.

704.10 Exterior structural members. Load-bearing structural members located within the exterior walls or on the outside of a building or structure shall be provided with the highest fire-resistance rating as determined in accordance with the following:

1 As required by Table 601 for the type of building element based on the type of construction of the building.

2 As required by Table 601 for exterior bearing walls based on the type of construction.

3 As required by Table 705.5 for exterior walls based on the fire separation distance.

Exterior load-bearing structural members, such as columns or girders, must have the same fire-resistance rating required for exterior load-bearing walls. As such, the required fire-resistance rating is the higher rating of that found in Table 601 for type of construction for structural elements or bearing walls or as required in Table 705.5 based on the fire separation distance.

704.11 Bottom flange protection. Fire protection is not required at the bottom flange of lintels, shelf angles and plates, spanning not more than 2 m whether part of the primary structural frame or not, and from the bottom flange of lintels, shelf angles and plates not part of the structural frame, regardless of span.

Structural frame elements located over an opening in a wall required to be fire-resistance rated, particularly a masonry wall with an exposed steel lintel or angle over the wall opening, are covered by this section. The bottom flanges of such lintels or angles if less than 2 meters in length are not required to be protected even if part of the primary structural frame. Regardless of the span, the bottom flange of such lintels or angles is not required to be protected if the member is not part of the primary structural frame.

704.12 Seismic isolation systems. Fire-resistance ratings for the isolation system shall meet the fire-resistance rating required for the columns, walls or other structural elements in which the isolation system is installed in accordance with Table 601. Isolation systems required to have a fire-resistance rating shall be protected with approved materials or construction assemblies designed to provide the same degree of fire resistance as the structural element in which the system is installed when tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 (see Section 703.2).

Such isolation system protection applied to isolator

===== Page 0541 =====
units shall be capable of retarding the transfer of heat to the isolator unit in such a manner that the required gravity load-carrying capacity of the isolator unit will not be impaired after exposure to the standard time-temperature curve fire test prescribed in ASTM E 119 or UL 263 for a duration not less than that required for the fire-resistance rating of the structure element in which the system is installed.

Such isolation system protection applied to isolator units shall be suitably designed and securely installed so as not to dislodge, loosen, sustain damage or otherwise impair its ability to accommodate the seismic movements for which the isolator unit is designed and to maintain its integrity for the purpose of providing the required fire-resistance protection.

This section states that the fire-resistance requirements for seismic isolation systems are the same as those for other structural elements, as required in Table 601. Additionally, the fire-resistance method used must be able to withstand the anticipated movement of the system without the fire-resistance application methods and systems affecting its functionality during a seismic event. Elements of the system can either be individually protected or contained within a tested assembly. Another key element of this section is that, when tested under exposure to the standard time-temperature curve test, the structural elements are still able to carry the gravity load as designed.

704.13 Sprayed fire-resistant materials (SFRM). Sprayed fire-resistant materials (SFRM) shall comply with Sections 704.13.3.1 through 704.13.5.

The intent of this code section is to increase the in-place durability of spray-applied fire-resistant materials (SFRM). Events as simple as an elevator movement, building sway or maintenance activities can dislodge SFRM if it is not adhered properly. These code requirements as well as the special testing requirements in Section 1705.14 are necessary to increase the in-place capability of SFRM assemblies. Section 403.2.3 in the high-rise buildings section gives the bond strength requirements for SFRM.

704.13.1 Fire-resistance rating. The application of SFRM shall be consistent with the fire-resistance rating and the listing, including, but not limited to, minimum thickness and dry density of the applied SFRM, method of application, substrate surface conditions and the use of bonding adhesives, sealants, reinforcing or other materials.
In order for the fire-resistance rating that is actually realized by sprayed fire-resistant materials to equal or exceed the required fire-resistance rating, it is necessary to install the materials in accordance with their listing. In this section, minimum thicknesses, proper conditions of the substrate, method of application, and correct bonding materials are all items that are necessary to ensure the proper performance of these materials.

704.13.2 Manufacturer's installation instructions. The application of SFRM shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. The instructions shall include, but are not limited to, substrate temperatures and surface conditions and SFRM handling, storage, mixing, conveyance, method of application, curing and ventilation.

Sections 704.13.1 and 704.13.2 require that the application of SFRM be in accordance with all terms and conditions of the listing and the manufacturer's instruction.

704.13.3 Substrate condition. The SFRM shall be applied to a substrate in compliance with Sections 704.13.3.1 through 704.13.3.2.

The in-place adhesion of SFRM may be able to be reduced by a factor of as high as 10 when applied over certain primers compared to the adhesion obtained by the rated material applied on bare, clean steel. This Section gives the requirements for the surface condition of the substrate receiving the SFRM.

704.13.3.1 Surface conditions. Substrates to receive SFRM shall be free of dirt, oil, grease, release agents, loose scale and any other condition that prevents adhesion. The substrates shall be free of primers, paints and encapsulants other than those fire tested and listed by a nationally recognized testing agency. Primed, painted or encapsulated steel shall be allowed, provided that testing has demonstrated that required adhesion is maintained.

As discussed in the commentary to Section 704.13.3, the cleanliness or surface preparation of the materials intended to receive SFRM is critical.

704.13.3.2 Primers, paints and encapsulants. Where the SFRM is to be applied over primers, paints or encapsulants other than those specified in the listing, the material shall be field tested in accordance with ASTM E 736. Where testing of the SFRM with primers, paints or encapsulants demonstrates that required adhesion is maintained, SFRM shall be permitted to be applied to primed, painted or encapsulated wide flange steel shapes in accordance with the following conditions:

1 The beam flange width does not exceed 300 mm; or

===== Page 0542 =====
2 The column flange width does not exceed 400 mm; or

3 The beam or column web depth does not exceed 400 mm.

4 The average and minimum bond strength values shall be determined based on not fewer than five bond tests conducted in accordance with ASTM E736. Bond tests conducted in accordance with ASTM E736 shall indicate an average bond strength of not less than 80 percent and an individual bond strength of not less than 50 percent, when compared to the bond strength of the SFRM as applied to clean, uncoated 3.2 mm steel plate.

When there is some sort of material, such as paint or primer, on the steel structural members where it is desired to install SFRM, it is still possible to apply the SFRM to the steel without removing the material. However, this section specifies that a field test in accordance with ASTM E736 be done on the SFRM so applied. This ensures that a bond strength is achieved and that the material will remain in place. Note that there are limitations on the sizes of structural members that can utilize this field test (Conditions 1-3).

704.13.4 Temperature. A minimum ambient and substrate temperature of  \( 4.5^{\circ} \) C shall be maintained during and for not fewer than 24 hours after the application of the SFRM, unless the manufacturer's instructions allow otherwise.

This section gives the minimum temperature for the air and the material itself, which must be maintained during application and for 24 hours after, unless the manufacturer's instructions allow otherwise.

704.13.5 Finished condition. The finished condition of SFRM applied to structural members or assemblies shall not, upon complete drying or curing, exhibit cracks, voids, spalls, delamination or any exposure of the substrate. Surface irregularities of SFRM shall be deemed acceptable.

This section and the special inspections required by Section 1705.13 establish the acceptance criteria for the finished condition of the SFRM.

## SECTION 705 EXTERIOR WALLS

705.1 General. Exterior walls shall comply with this section.

In order to accomplish these functions, this section regulates the fire protection capability of the exterior wall, including limitations on openings in the walls. The requirements contained herein and in Table 705.5 are based on the fire separation distance, the occupancy that represents a relative fuel loading and the percentage of openings in the wall. Section 705.8.5 also regulates the location of openings in order to prevent ignition of materials in adjacent stories.

All other applicable provisions of the code concerning exterior walls still apply. The provisions of this section refer to the fire-resistance requirements contained in Table 601 and Table 705.5 (see Section 705.5). Table 601 establishes minimum fire-resistance ratings for load-bearing exterior walls based on the type of construction that addresses the structural integrity of the building under fire conditions. Table 705.5 establishes ratings based on fire separation distance in an effort to address conflagration concerns.

705.2 Projections. Cornices, eave overhangs, exterior balconies and similar projections extending beyond the exterior wall shall conform to the requirements of this section and Section 1405. Exterior egress balconies and exterior exit stairways and ramps shall comply with Sections 1021 and 1027, respectively. Projections shall not extend any closer to the line used to determine the fire separation distance than shown in Table 705.2.

Exception: Buildings on the same lot and considered as portions of one building in accordance with Section 705.3 are not required to comply with this section for projections between the buildings.

Horizontal projections, similar to walls and openings, are a potential source of the spread of fire from building to building. Some projections from the building exterior wall may even shelter combustible materials. As such, limits on the allowable projections are necessary. Examples of horizontal projections are roof overhangs, exterior balconies, canopies and covered porches. Balcony projections must also meet the requirements of Section 705.2.3.1, while exterior egress balconies must meet Section 1021.

The first column in Table 705.2 is Fire Separation Distance (FSD) and is measured from the lot line or assumed lot line to the exterior wall—not to the edge of the overhang. The second column is distance from the line used to determine the FSD to the vertical edge of the overhang. For examples of the application of Table 705.2, see Commentary Figure 705.2.

The exception addresses buildings on the same lot that together qualify as one aggregate building under the limitations of Chapter 5. Projections on the exterior walls of these buildings that face each other are not limited in length.

705.2.1 Type I and II construction. Projections from walls of Type I or II construction shall be of

===== Page 0543 =====
noncombustible materials or combustible materials as allowed by Sections 705.2.3.1 and 705.2.4.

The code requires projections from walls of Type I and II materials to be noncombustible. An exception for combustible materials is for balconies (Section 705.2.3.1) and bay windows (Section 705.2.4.). Buildings of Type I through IV construction require the exterior walls to be noncombustible. However, the code places a higher restriction on projections on the two highest types of construction, while Section 705.2.2 allows combustible projections on buildings of Type III and IV construction.

705.2.2 Type III, IV or V construction. Projections from walls of Type III, IV or V construction shall be of any approved material.

* Types III and IV and V construction are permitted to be constructed of approved noncombustible or combustible materials.

705.2.3 Projection protection. Projections extending to within 1500 mm of the line used to determine the fire separation distance shall be one of the following:

1 Noncombustible materials.

2 Combustible materials of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

3 Heavy timber construction complying with Section 2304.11.

4 Fire-retardant-treated wood.

5 As permitted by Section 705.2.3.1.
Exception: Type VB construction shall be allowed for combustible projections in Group R-3 and U occupancies with a fire separation distance greater than or equal to 1.5 m.

This Section clarifies the requirements for projection protection. This Section determines the protection requirements for projection extend to within 1.5 m of the line (either the property line or the assumed line) used to determine the fire separation distance (FSD) (see Section 202).

This allowance applies where the projection is constructed with any of the materials listed in this section.

The first four are self-explanatory. Section 705.2.3.1 has construction requirements for balconies and similar projections regardless of their location on the property.

The other protection method mentioned in Section 705.2.3.1 is sprinklers. Balconies and similar projections in Type III, IV and V construction may be combustible if sprinklers are extended into the balcony area.

There is an exception to combustible projection protection for Type VB construction in Group R-3 and Group U occupancies with an FSD equal to or greater than 1.5 m.
705.2.3.1 Balconies and similar projections. Balconies and similar projections of combustible construction other than fire-retardant-treated wood shall be fire resistance rated where required by Table 601 for floor construction or shall be of heavy timber construction in accordance with Section 2304.11. The aggregate length of the projections shall not exceed 50 percent of the building's perimeter on each floor.

Exceptions:

1. On buildings of Types I and II construction, three stories or less above grade plane, fire-retardant-treated wood shall be permitted for balconies, porches, decks and exterior stairways not used as required exits.

2. Untreated wood and plastic composites that comply with ASTM D7032 and Section 2612 are permitted for pickets, rails and similar guard components that are limited to 1050 mm in height.

3. Balconies and similar projections on buildings of Types III, IV and V construction shall be permitted to be of Type V construction and shall not be required to have a fire-resistance rating where sprinkler protection is extended to these areas.

4. Where sprinkler protection is extended to the balcony areas, the aggregate length of the balcony on each floor shall not be limited.

Because these elements are, in a sense, an extension of floor construction, combustible appendages are required to afford the same required fire-resistance rating as required for floor construction in Table 601, unless the appendage is of FRTW or heavy timber construction complying with Section 2304.11. As an additional safeguard against exterior fire spread, the aggregate length of combustible appendages must not exceed 50 percent of the building perimeter on each floor. Balconies, porches, decks, supplemental exterior stairs and similar appendages in buildings of Types I and II construction are required to be constructed of noncombustible materials in order to prevent fire involvement and fire spread up or along the exterior of a noncombustible building. In buildings of Types III, IV and V construction, the use of combustible materials for these elements is permitted.

Exception 1 permits balconies and similar appendages to be constructed of FRTW where buildings of Types I and II construction do not exceed three stories in height. This is because

===== Page 0544 =====
of the limited combustibility of FRTW. The three-story limitation is similar to the provisions contained in Section 1405.1.1 for combustible exterior wall coverings.

Exception 2 permits the use of untreated wood and plastic composites for guard components and handrails for all types of construction in an attempt to alleviate the warping and maintenance problems associated with thin members used for pickets and rails.

Exception 3 is applicable to buildings of Types III, IV and V construction. Balconies and similar projections need not be constructed of FRTW nor have a fire-resistance rating when the appendages are protected with an automatic sprinkler system. The presence of sprinkler protection, such as a dry pendent sprinkler, will also serve to limit fire spread from floor to floor. Balconies, porches, decks and supplemental exterior stairways that are not attached to or supported by the building are separate structures and are to be built accordingly. Although the structural support may be independent, such structures could serve to assist vertical fire spread depending on the construction of the exterior wall and the presence or lack of opening protectives.

705.2.4 Bay and oriel windows. Bay and oriel windows constructed of combustible materials constructed of combustible materials shall conform to the type of construction required for the building to which they are attached.

Exception: Fire-retardant-treated wood shall be permitted on buildings three stories or less above grade plane of Type I, II, III or IV construction.

In all buildings of other than Type V construction, bay windows and similar appendages are required to be constructed of noncombustible materials (see Commentary Figure 705.2.4). This is consistent with the requirements for exterior walls in Type I, II, III or IV construction in Sections 602.2 through 602.4. Based upon the limited combustibility of these elements of FRTW, the exception permits their use on buildings of Type I, II, III or IV construction when the elements are constructed of FRTW, and the building does not exceed three stories.

705.3 Buildings on the same lot. For the purposes of determining the required wall and opening protection, projections and roof-covering requirements, buildings on the same lot shall be assumed to have an imaginary line between them. Where a new building is to be erected on the same lot as an existing building, the location of the assumed imaginary line with relation to the existing building shall be such that the exterior wall and opening protection of the existing building meet the criteria as set forth in Sections 705.5 and 705.8.

Exceptions:

1. Two or more buildings on the same lot shall be either regulated as separate buildings or shall be considered as portions of one building if the aggregate area of such buildings is within the limits specified in Chapter 5 for a single building. Where the buildings contain different occupancy groups or are of different types of construction, the area shall be that allowed for the most restrictive occupancy or construction.

2. Where an S-2 parking garage of Construction Type I or IIA is erected on the same lot as a Group R-2 building, and there is no fire separation distance between these buildings, then the adjoining exterior walls between the buildings are permitted to have occupant use openings in accordance with Section 706.8. However, opening protectives in such openings shall only be required in the exterior wall of the S-2 parking garage, not in the exterior wall openings in the R-2 building, and these opening protectives in the exterior wall of the S-2 parking garage shall be not less than 1  \( \frac{1}{2} \)  hour fire protection rating.

This section addresses buildings on the same lot and requires that an imaginary lot line be established between buildings in order to determine exterior wall fire ratings and opening protectives (see the definition of "Fire separation distance"). This section takes the approach of limiting the conflagration hazard between buildings on the same property. Exception #1 permits two buildings on the same lot to be exempt from Sections 705.5 and 705.8 when considered as one building in accordance with Section 503.1.2. The provisions of Section 705.8.5 would still apply, since a need exists to restrict fire spread between stories within a building. Although not specifically identified in the exception, Section 705.11 would not apply, since it is dependent on the exterior wall being required to have a fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section 705.5, which relates to measurement of FSD. The last sentence of the exception reminds the user that normal code requirements would still be applicable once the two buildings are considered as one. Therefore, if two types of construction are involved, then the lowest type of construction would be assumed for the entire building because there is no fire wall between them. In

===== Page 0545 =====
applying this last sentence, it is probably easiest to determine what the requirement is if the user imagines what the code requirement would be if the buildings were pushed together. In such a case, it would be easier to see that a fire wall would be needed between portions of a building that are of two different construction types or the entire building would have to be viewed as the lowest possible type of construction. Regarding occupancies and associated allowable areas, they would be separated per Section 508.4 or considered as Nonseparated occupancies per Section 508.3 and, therefore, use the most restrictive allowable area.

In order to help make sense of the last sentence of the exception, the idea of imagining the two buildings being pushed together, as mentioned above, is helpful. Then realize that simply pulling the building apart should not increase or lessen the code requirements for that “single” building.

Exception 2 takes into account a practical design issue.

The great majority of multifamily projects are being built with parking garages beside apartment buildings. Access from the parking garage into the apartment unit's floor is provided at each garage floor onto the apartment's floor for convenience as well as for safety for the apartment dwellers. Many designs have one or more of the exterior walls of the parking garage and the apartment building at a 0-meter fire separation distance. The requirements within Table 705.8 would prohibit any openings in these exterior walls between the parking garage and the apartment building. Based on the protection afforded by the sprinkler system in the R-2 use and the inherent fire safety of the parking garage, this exception would allow these openings. See Commentary Figure 705.3 for an illustration of this condition.

705.4 Materials. Exterior walls shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

The material (combustible or noncombustible) requirements for exterior walls are found in Sections 602.1 through 602.5. Only Type V construction allows exterior walls to be combustible construction. Other types of construction require exterior walls, or at least the framing members, to be noncombustible. Type I and II construction allows limited use of fire-retardant wood for exterior non-load-bearing walls. All types of construction allow insulation, exterior wall coverings and interior finish to be combustible within limits. See sections 603, 720 and 1404.5 for materials allowed within and on framed exterior walls.
705.5 Fire-resistance ratings. Exterior walls shall be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Table 601, based on the type of construction, and Table 705.5, based on the fire separation distance. The required fire-resistance rating of exterior walls with a fire separation distance of greater than 3 m shall be rated for exposure to fire from the inside. The required fire-resistance rating of exterior walls with a fire separation distance of less than or equal to 3 m shall be rated for exposure to fire from both sides.

★ Table 601 states the requirements for the fire-resistance ratings for load-bearing exterior walls. All load-bearing exterior walls except those in Type IIB and VB construction require some degree of fire-resistance rating. Table 705.5 states the requirements for the fire-resistance ratings for both load bearing and nonload-bearing exterior walls. Whereas Table 705.5 is based on the fire separation distance, the type of construction and the occupancy group, Table 601 requirements are only a function of the type of construction. The Table resulting in the highest fire-resistance rating shall be used.

Fire exposure from the outside of the building is thought to be from other buildings either on the same property or another property. Therefore, with increased FSD, the spread of fire from building to building is lessened. For years the code required the fire-resistance rating to be from both sides of the exterior wall when the FSD was 1.5 m or less. During the development of SBC 201, it was decided that exterior walls that had no required fire-resistance rating according to Tables 601 and 705.5 could have unlimited unprotected openings (see Section 705.8.1, Exception 2). This would allow an exterior wall in a Type IIB or VB building of nearly any occupancy group to have unlimited openings and a nonfire-resistance-rated wall at an FSD of 3 m. You could have another building 4.5 m-plus from the first building with an exterior wall without fire-resistance rating from the exterior exposure because that building would have an FSD of 1.5 m. The consensus now is that an FSD of 3 m is more practical for allowing the fire-resistance ratings of the exterior wall to be based on interior surface exposure only. Now the fire-resistance rating of the exterior wall is from both sides when the FSD is 3 m or less.

See Table 705.5.
This Table establishes the minimum fire-resistance ratings for both load bearing and nonload-bearing exterior walls based on fire separation distance as defined in Section 202. The required ratings are based on the fuel load, probable fire intensity of the various occupancy

===== Page 0546 =====
classifications and the physical separation between the exterior wall and the line used to determine fire separation distance as established in Section 202 [see Commentary Figure 705.5(1)]. In using the table, the occupancy classification of the building and the fire separation distance of the walls must be determined. Once determined, the required fire-resistance rating is obtained by referring to the appropriate row and column corresponding to these parameters.

This Table includes construction types that were added in the 2021 SBC 201 (Types IV-A, IV-B, and IV-C). Type IV-A construction, which has the same structural fire resistance requirements in Table 601 as Type I-A construction, has been added where Type I-A construction already specifically appears. Further, Type IV-B construction, which has the same structural fire-resistance requirements in Table 601 as Type I-B construction, and which shares many height provisions with Type I-B construction as a result of the changes to the height and area tables, has been added to the Table where Type I-B construction already specifically appears. These additions are made in light of the comparisons made during code development between Types IV-A and I-A, and Types IV-B and I-B, and the need to require the higher exterior wall ratings for Types IV-A and IV-B construction to match the requirements already existing for Types I-A and I-B.

development between Types IV-A and I-A, and the need to require the higher exterior wall ratings for Types IV-A and IV-B construction to match the requirements already existing for Types I-A and I-B.

Note a indicates that the fire-resistance-rating requirements of Table 601, which are based on construction type, also apply. Exterior load-bearing walls must conform to the higher of the fire-resistance ratings specified in Tables 601 and 705.5. Exterior nonload-bearing walls need only comply with Table 705.5.

Note b requires walls that are located on lot lines between adjacent buildings (i.e., zero fire separation distance) to be constructed as fire walls and be rated in accordance with Table 706.4.

Note c permits the exterior walls of an open parking garage to have no fire-resistance rating where the fire separation distance is at least 3 m. Table 705.8 allows the openings to be unlimited for open parking garages at 3 m of fire separation distance. If the amount of openings is no longer limited, then the entire wall could be removed.

Note d clarifies that the required minimum fire-resistance rating of each exterior wall in each story of a building must be determined separately. Should a multistory building be configured such that the fire separation distance of each story is different, the required fire-resistance ratings associated with each of the exterior walls in each of those stories is established separately [see Commentary Figure 705.5(2)].

Note e provides a reference for Group H occupancies to Section 415.6 where there are specific standards for fire separation distances and wall and opening protection that supersede those of Table 705.5.

Note f provides a reference to Section 412.3.1 regulating aircraft hangars where there are specific standards for fire separation distances that supersede Table 705.5.

Note g allows for an elimination of the required wall protection for those exterior walls permitted to have unlimited openings in accordance with Table 705.8. For buildings protected by an automatic sprinkler system, Table 705.8 allows unlimited openings in walls with a fire separation distance of 6 m or more. This note is limited to the fire-resistance rating requirements of this Table and does not eliminate requirements established in Table 601 for loadbearing walls. Wall and opening protection for Group H-1, H-2 and H-3 occupancies is established by Section 415.6.

Note h addresses Group U occupancy garages and carports. Such structures are usually small and either stand alone or are attached to smaller apartment buildings or commercial buildings. This note would not apply to a Group U structure not used for the parking and storage of motor vehicles. Other Group U occupancies would have a minimum 1-hour fire-resistance rating for a fire separation distance of less than 3 m.

Note i clarifies the exterior wall protection for Group R-3 occupancies of Type IIB and Type VB construction.

Where Table 705.8 allows unlimited area of unprotected openings, a fire-resistive rating at nonbearing exterior walls is not required per Note h. For most occupancies, this is determined within the table; however, for Group R-3, Note f of Table 705.8 addresses the R-3 requirement. In addition, bearing walls of Type IIB and Type VB construction are not required to be rated in accordance with Table 601. As a result, this Table is the controlling Table for bearing and nonbearing walls in those types of construction.

===== Page 0547 =====
705.6 Structural stability. Exterior walls shall extend to the height required by Section 705.11. Interior structural elements that brace the exterior wall but that are not located within the plane of the exterior wall shall have the minimum fire-resistance rating required in Table 601 for that structural element. Structural elements that brace the exterior wall but are located outside of the exterior wall or within the plane of the exterior wall shall have the minimum fire-resistance rating required in Table 601 and Table 705.5 for the exterior wall.

Structural stability of fire-resistance-rated construction is an important concern. This Section requires elements providing bracing support to be fire-resistance rated for the same duration of time as the exterior wall. In light-frame platform construction, this will require that the band joint or beam supporting the floor and the wall above to also be of fire-resistant construction. Although the floor construction itself may not be required to be of fire-resistance-rated construction in Type IIB and VB construction, some effort must be made to ensure that the floor joints, at least at the exterior wall, are of fire-resistant-rated construction. Although the floor framing acts as a lateral support for the exterior wall, this Section does not require that the entire floor system be of fire-resistance-rated construction. To state otherwise would prohibit Type IIB and VB buildings with an FSD of less than 3 m. Only the structural element within the floor system that supports the vertical load of the wall must be of fire-resistance-rated construction.

For exterior walls, this section requires fire-resistance-rated construction to extend to the roof construction or to the top of the parapet if a parapet is required (see Section 705.11). This begs the question in conventional light frame platform construction, is the floor system supported by the lower exterior wall and supporting the exterior wall above part of the exterior wall? And, if so, how and to what limits do you go to provide a fire-resistance rating? This is a valid concern in Type IIB and VB construction with an FSD of less than 3 m because the exterior wall is required to have a fire-resistance rating while the floor system is not. Both the continuity and the structural integrity issue are illustrated in Commentary Figure 705.6.

When parapet walls are not required, the exterior wall for fire-resistant rating purposes stops at the roof/ceiling construction.

Interior structural elements which brace an exterior wall do not require a fire-resistance rating equal to the wall it braces. However, the structural element must have a fire-resistance rating as required by Table 601 for that structural element.

This section does not require that the wall remain in place when the structure collapses. That language is only used for fire wall structural integrity.

705.7 Unexposed surface temperature. Where protected openings are not limited by Section 705.8, the limitation on the rise of temperature on the unexposed surface of exterior walls as required by ASTM E119 or UL 263 shall not apply. Where protected openings are limited by Section 705.8, the limitation on the rise of temperature on the unexposed surface of exterior walls as required by ASTM E119 or UL 263 shall not apply provided that a correction is made for radiation from the unexposed exterior wall surface in accordance with the following formula:

 \[ A_{e}=A+\left(A_{f}x F_{e0}\right) \quad (7-1) \]

where:

 \( A_{e}= \) Equivalent area of protected openings.

A = Actual area of protected openings.

 \( A_{f}= \) Area of exterior wall surface in the story under consideration exclusive of openings, on which the temperature limitations of ASTM E 119 or UL 263 for walls are exceeded.

 \( F_{eo}=An \)  “equivalent opening factor” derived from Figure 705.7 based on the average temperature of the unexposed wall surface and the fire-resistance rating of the wall.

The purpose of this provision is to allow the use of an exterior fire-resistance-rated wall assembly that does not meet all of the conditions of acceptance of ASTM E119 or UL 263. The only condition that may not apply is the limitation on the rise of temperature on the unexposed surface of the wall. To pass the standard, the rise of temperature cannot exceed 121°C above the initial temperature. All listed fire-resistance-rated exterior walls and partitions meet all of the conditions of acceptance. If a particular required fire-resistance-rated exterior wall was not listed by an approved testing agency for the required duration of time, then this section could be applicable.

For exterior walls with FSDs of 6 m or greater, the limitation on the rise of temperature on the unexposed surface of the exterior wall does not apply. This is practical because at 6 m an unlimited area of protected openings can be installed; protected openings are treated as windows or doors and the standard fire test for windows and doors does not have a limit on the temperature rise. To accept a non-listed exterior wall assembly, the failed test data would have to be provided showing that the assembly did indeed pass all of the conditions.

===== Page 0548 =====
of acceptance except rise of temperature on the unexposed surface.

For required exterior walls with FSDs of less than 6 m, the limitation on the rise of temperature on the unexposed surface of the exterior wall may not apply. To accept a non-listed exterior wall assembly, the failed test data would have to be provided showing that the assembly did indeed pass all of the conditions of acceptance except rise of temperature on the unexposed surface. The test data must also state the average temperature of the unexposed surface at the time duration for which the exterior wall is required to be rated. We must make a correction for the radiation from the unexposed exterior wall surface. We convert the wall surface which has too much temperature rise to an equivalent amount of protected openings. Then we check for compliance with the opening provisions of Section 705.8.1 as always. See Example 705.7:

As shown in Commentary Figure 705.7, Example 705.7:

The exterior bearing wall of a Type VA non sprinklered building with a Group B occupancy is 4.85 m from an interior lot line. The designer chose to use an exterior wall assembly which failed the ASTM E119 fire test because of the rise of temperature of the unexposed surface. The designer supplies the failed test data which clearly shows that the wall met all conditions of acceptance for a 1-hour fire-resistance rating except the rise of temperature on the unexposed side which was an average of 649°C at 1-hour fire duration. Since the temperature rise exceeds the allowed, we must treat the wall surface as though it had an equivalent area of protected openings. Solution:

From Table 705.5: the exterior wall must be fire-resistance rated for 1 hour.

From Table 705.8: the wall may have 75-percent protected wall openings or 25-percent unprotected wall openings or a combination of the two in accordance with Section 705.8.4

From drawing of exterior wall elevation: total area of wall = 65 m².

Total area of protected openings = 0
Total area of unprotected openings = 11 m².
Total area of exterior wall surface minus the openings = 54 m².

• First, we compute the equivalent area of protected openings using Equation 7-1:

• We can calculate from the drawings the actual area of protected openings which is A. A = 0.
• We can calculate A_{f} from the drawings. It is the total area of the wall surface minus the openings. 65 - 11 = 54 m^{2}.

We can obtain  \( F_{eo} \)  from Figure 705.7. Using the given average temperature rise on the unexposed side which was 649 °C and the curve on the figure for 1 hour and reading to the left leg-end we find that  \( F_{eo} \)  for this assembly is 0.34.

• Equation 7-1 yields:  \( A_{e} = 0 + (54 \times 0.34) \)  or  \( A_{e} = 18.3 \, m^{2} \) .

Having solved for the equivalent area of protected openings we can now proceed as normal by checking compliance with Section 705.8.4 since we have a mix of protected and unprotected openings in the fire-resistance-rated exterior wall.

From Table 705.8: seventy-five percent of the total wall area may be protected openings or  \( 0.75 \times 65.03 \, m^{2} = 48.77 \, m^{2} \) .

From Table 705.8: twenty-five percent of the total wall area may be unprotected openings or  \( 0.25 \times 65.03 \, m^{2} = 16.26 \, m^{2} \) .

From Equation 7-2:  \( (A_{p}/a_{p}) + (A_{u}/a_{u}) \leq 1 \)  or we have too many openings in the wall.

From Equation 7-2 and using  \( A_{e} \)  computed above for  \( A_{p} \)  we have (18.3/48.77) + (11/16.26) ≤ 1 or 0.375 + 0.676 = 1.05 which is not less than or equal to 1. The wall does not meet the code. Too many openings.

705.8 Openings. Openings in exterior walls shall comply with Sections 705.8.1 through 705.8.6.

The requirements of this Section limit the allowable area of openings in exterior walls and are applicable to buildings with or without walls with FSDs less than 9 m. The limitations on openings in exterior walls is a function of FSD (see definition in Chapter 2) and the degree of protection provided for the opening. The degree of protection of the openings is either unprotected in a nonsprinklered building (UP, NS), unprotected in a sprinklered building (UP, S) or protected openings (P). Protected openings are openings with fire doors, fire shutters or fire window assemblies that comply with Sections 716.5 and 716.6. Sprinklered buildings are buildings with an NFPA 13 sprinkler system. Buildings with only an NFPA 13R system shall be considered nonsprinklered for the purpose of opening limitations in exterior walls. The percentage of openings allowed is in Table 705.8, subject to the exceptions in Section 705.8.1.

See Table 705.8

Table 705.8 provides allowable areas for exterior wall openings for structures based on the FSD of the exterior wall and the degree of

===== Page 0549 =====
protection afforded to the opening, such as fire shutters and automatic sprinkler systems. The more protection provided, the larger the area of openings can get.

705.8.1 Allowable area of openings. The maximum area of unprotected and protected openings permitted in an exterior wall in any story of a building shall not exceed the percentages specified in Table 705.8 based on the fire separation distance of each individual story.

Exceptions:

1. In other than Group H occupancies, unlimited unprotected openings are permitted in the first story above grade plane where the wall faces one of the following:

1.1.A street and has a fire separation distance of more than 4.5 m.

1.2. An unoccupied space. The unoccupied space shall be on the same lot or dedicated for public use, shall be not less than 9 m in width and shall have access from a street by a posted fire lane in accordance with SBC 801.

2. Buildings whose exterior bearing walls, exterior non-bearing walls and exterior primary structural frame are not required to be fire-resistance rated shall be permitted to have unlimited unprotected openings.

The allowable area is given as a percentage of the total wall area at any story. Each story must comply independently based on its own fire separation distance. Buildings with offsets at stories would have fire separation distances unique to each offset story. See Commentary Figure 705.8.1(1) and Figure 705.8.1(2).

Exception 1.1 only applies to the exterior walls on the first story above grade. For all occupancies except Group H, the first-story exterior wall that faces a street and that is at least 4.5 m from the wall to the centerline of the street shall be allowed unlimited unprotected openings.

Exception 1.2 also applies to the exterior walls on only the first story above grade. For all occupancies except Group H, the first-story exterior wall that faces a minimum 9 m wide unoccupied space either on the same lot or dedicated for public use with access from a street by a fire lane, shall be allowed unlimited unprotected openings.

Since the first story above grade is generally readily available for fire department access, unprotected openings are not limited in the above exception. See Commentary Figure 705.8.1(3) for examples of first-story openings.
Exception 2 is for openings in all exterior walls in all stories where Table 601 and Table 705.5 do not require any exterior wall (bearing or nonbearing) or primary structural member to be fire-resistance rated. Therefore, this exception is only applicable to Type IIB and VB construction with an FSD of 3 m or greater. This allows unlimited unprotected openings in Type IIB and VB construction for all exterior walls facing an FSD of 3 m or more.

705.8.2 Protected openings. Where openings are required to be protected, opening protectives shall comply Section 716.

Exception: Opening protectives are not required where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the exterior openings are protected by a water curtain using automatic sprinklers approved for that use.

To be considered protected, the opening must have a listed and labeled fire door, fire shutter or fire window meeting the requirements of Section 716. The required fire protection rating of doors in protected openings of exterior walls shall be in accordance with Table 716.1(1). Protected window assemblies shall have the fire protection rating as indicated in Table 716.1(3).

The exception to Section 705.8.2 is irrelevant for most occupancies. Table 705.8 allows the same percentage of opening area for protected openings and unprotected openings in sprinkled buildings and Table 705.8 does not have the water curtain requirement as the exception does. In a building sprinkled through with a full NFPA 13 system, the same percentage of openings is allowed, whether they are protected or unprotected.

The exception to Section 705.8.2 would be relevant for Group H occupancies since Note 1 to Table 705.8 makes the unprotected sprinklered category not applicable to Group H1, H2, and H3 occupancies.

705.8.3 Unprotected openings. Where unprotected openings are permitted, windows and doors shall be constructed of any approved materials. Glazing shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 24 and 26.

Unprotected openings can be windows and doors of any approved material. Glazing must meet the structural requirements and the safety requirements as applicable in Chapter 24 and 26. All openings in wind-borne debris regions must be protected by impact-resistant material in accordance with Section 1609.2 For purposes of exterior wall fire-resistance requirements and opening limitations, an

===== Page 0550 =====
unprotected opening can have nothing at all in it as a partial enclosed building. Sheds without exterior walls must also meet the requirements of Section 705.8 and Table 705.8.

705.8.4 Mixed openings. Where both unprotected and protected openings are located in the exterior wall in any story of a building, the total area of openings shall be determined in accordance with the following:

 \[ (A_{p}/a_{p})+(A_{u}/a_{u})\leq1 \quad (7-2) \]

where:
 \( A_{p}= \) Actual area of protected openings, or the equivalent area of protected openings,  \( A_{e} \)  (see Section 705.7).

 \( a_{p}= \) Allowable area of protected openings.

 \( A_{u}= \) Actual area of unprotected openings.

 \( a_{n}= \) Allowable area of unprotected openings.

The opening limitations in Table 705.8 vary according to the degrees of opening protection. The table establishes the acceptable percentage for openings if all openings were of one degree of protection. For instance, at 3.6 m if all openings are unprotected in a nonsprinklered building you can have only 15 percent of the wall area in unprotected openings. In that same exterior wall if all openings were protected, you could have 45 percent of the wall area in protected openings. If any exterior wall area in any story has both protected and unprotected openings, then the actual areas of both types of openings must meet Equation 7-2.

Example 705.8.4:

In a Type IIA building, the exterior wall is required to be of 1 hour fire-resistance-rated construction by Table 705.5. The wall has an FSD of 3.6 m. The building is non sprinklered. The wall in the first story has a total area of 100 m². The designer has 14 m² of protected openings in the wall and 9.3 m² of unprotected openings. Does this comply with the code, particularly Section 705.8.4?

Solution:

Use Equation 7-2

From the building in the example the protected openings are 14 m². This value is  \( A_{p} \) .

From Table 705.8 the allowable area (if only protected openings are used) is 45 percent. Forty-five percent of 100 m² is 45 m² (100 x 0.45 = 45). This value is  \( a_{p} \)  in the equation.

From the building in the example the unprotected openings are 9.3 m² This value is  \( A_{u} \)  in the equation.

From Table 705.8 the allowable area (if only unprotected openings are used) is 15 percent. Fifteen percent of 100 m² is 15 m² (100 x 0.15 = 15). This value is au in the equation.

Equation 7-2  \( (A_{p}/a_{p}) + (A_{u}/a_{u}) \leq 1 \)  or  \( (15/45) + (9.3/14) \leq 1 \)  or  \( 0.33 + 0.66 \leq 1 \)

This amount of openings exactly complies with the code. Had the sum of the ratios exceeded 1 the opening mixture would not be allowed.

705.8.5 Vertical separation of openings. Openings in exterior walls in adjacent stories shall be separated vertically to protect against fire spread on the exterior of the buildings where the openings are within 1.5 m of each other horizontally and the opening in the lower story is not a protected opening with a fire protection rating of not less than  \( \frac{3}{4} \)  hour. Such openings shall be separated vertically not less than 900 mm by spandrel girders, exterior walls or other similar assemblies that have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour, rated for exposure to fire from both sides, or by flame barriers that extend horizontally not less than 750 mm beyond the exterior wall. Flame barriers shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour. The unexposed surface temperature limitations specified in ASTM E 119 or UL 263 shall not apply to the flame barriers unless otherwise required by the provisions of this code.

Exceptions:

1. This section shall not apply to buildings that are three stories or less above grade plane.

2. This section shall not apply to buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

3. Open parking garages.

Where unprotected openings occur in adjacent stories, a fire that breaks out of an opening in a lower story can spread vertically to upper stories of the building. A vertical panel or horizontal flame barrier is necessary to minimize the possibility of vertical flame spread. The vertical panel is to be at least 900 mm in height and have a fire-resistance rating of at least 1 hour [see Commentary Figure 705.8.5(1)]. Note that the fire rating is required from both sides of the assembly regardless of fire separation distance. Full-scale fire tests have shown that the vertical panel should extend at least 750 mm above the finished floor level. This is to prevent the transfer of radiant heat to furnishings and other combustibles located in the lower portion of the room in the story above the assumed fire exposure. Horizontal flame barriers are required to extend at least 750 mm beyond the face of the exterior

===== Page 0551 =====
wall and have a fire-resistance rating of at least 1 hour [see Commentary Figure 705.8.5(2)]. This section requires such protection when the opening on the lower level is not fire-protection rated for  \( \frac{3}{4} \)  hour or more. The use of glazing is one example of why this section is so specific. Wired glass, for example, has been shown to retain its integrity with limited fire exposure when exposed to a fire condition for a certain period of time. For this reason, wired glass has historically been recognized as a suitable exterior opening protective within size and mounting methods defined by its listing.

Wired glass permits a significant percentage, typically recognized as high as 50 percent, of radiant heat energy to pass through. Since the initial concern is heat radiated from the flame plume, wired glass does little to prevent ignition of combustibles in the room on the upper floor. This section permits the elimination of the unexposed surface temperature limitations prescribed by ASTM E119 for flame barriers and vertical shields. Fire spread between floors is primarily the result of radiant heat, not conductive heat transfer. Full-scale tests have shown that only a small degree of fire resistance is required for adequate protection since radiant energy is the primary concern and glazing in the unprotected openings above the story of fire origin may break within 1 minute.

Protection is not required for buildings three stories or less in height. This exception is consistent with Table 504.4, which permits buildings of three stories in height to be of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction when these buildings do not require a fire-resistance rating for the floor construction.

The exception for buildings protected with an automatic sprinkler system is consistent with the code's approach to limiting fire size and, thus, limiting spread of fire beyond the area or room of origin. The exception is based on the effectiveness and reliability of automatic sprinkler systems in decreasing fire size. The reference to Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 reinforces that the system must be a code-compliant automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13 as modified by Section 903.3.1.1 or in accordance with NFPA 13R as modified by Section 903.3.1.2. Exception 3 acknowledges the practicality of constructing open parking structures and the need to have a significant amount of openings for natural ventilation.

705.8.6 Vertical exposure. For buildings on the same lot, opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than  \( \frac{3}{4} \)  hour shall be provided in every opening that is less than 4.5 m vertically above the roof of an adjacent building or structure based on assuming an imaginary line between them. The opening protectives are required where the fire separation distances from the imaginary line to each building or structure is less than 4.5 m.

## Exceptions:

1. Opening protectives are not required where the roof assembly of the adjacent building or structure has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour for a minimum distance of 3 m from the exterior wall facing the imaginary line and the entire length and span of the supporting elements for the fire-resistance-rated roof assembly has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.

2. Buildings on the same lot and considered as portions of one building in accordance with Section 705.3 are not required to comply with Section 705.8.6.

A fire in a building that is adjacent to a taller building can be the source of fire exposure to openings in the taller building. Although the height of a fire plume is dependent on several factors, this section requires 3/4-hour or greater opening protectives in the wall where the openings are within 4.5 m vertically above the roof of a building that is within a horizontal FSD of 4.5 m (see Commentary Figure 705.8.6). Full-scale tests have indicated that exterior flame plumes may extend higher than 4.85 m above a window using a fuel load of 39 kg/m². Since this provision is based on a fire exposure from the roof of the lower building, it does not apply where the roof construction is 1-hour fire-resistance rated, which reduces the potential for fire exposure.

705.9 Joints. Joints made in or between exterior walls required by this section to have a fire-resistance rating shall comply with Section 715.

Exception: Joints in exterior walls that are permitted to have unprotected openings.

Joints, such as expansion or seismic, are another form of opening in exterior walls, and therefore, must be considered with regard to maintaining the fire-resistance ratings of the exterior walls. This section requires that all joints located in exterior walls required to be fire-resistance rated are to be protected by a joint system that has a fire-resistance rating and complies with the requirements of Section 715 (see commentary to Section 715). The exception to joint protection here and in Section 715 is for exterior walls that are permitted by Table 705.8 to have unprotected openings. Therefore, this section requires fire-resistant joint systems to protect joints in

===== Page 0552 =====
exterior walls of non-sprinklered buildings with an FSD of 1.5 m or less; in sprinklered buildings with an FSD of 900 mm or less; and in Group H2 or H3 buildings with an FSD of 4.5 m or less (see note to Table 705.8). This implies that the building may have joints in fire-resistance-rated walls with an FSD of less than 900 mm. In this context, joints are not treated like openings, which are not permitted in walls with an FSD of less than 900 mm.

705.9.1 Voids. The void created at the intersection of a floor/ceiling assembly and an exterior curtain wall assembly shall be protected in accordance with Section 715.4.

See the commentary to Section 715.4.

705.10 Ducts and air transfer openings. Penetrations by air ducts and air transfer openings in fire-resistance-rated exterior walls required to have protected openings shall comply with Section 717.

Exception: Foundation vents installed in accordance with this code are permitted.

This section requires air outlets in exterior walls, including air intake and air exhaust outlets, to be protected by fire dampers where Table 705.8 requires protected openings. That is a wall with an FSD from 900 mm to 1.5 m for Nonsprinklered buildings. For sprinklered buildings, protected openings are never required, so air outlets can be located in an exterior wall with an FSD of 900 mm (or more. There can be no openings in a wall with an FSD of less than 900 mm. Fire damper assembly standards are in accordance with Section 717. Exhaust outlets that cannot have fire dampers (such as commercial kitchen hood exhausts) cannot be located in exterior walls in locations where openings are required to be protected in accordance with Table 705.8.

705.11 Parapets. Parapets shall be provided on exterior walls of buildings.

Exceptions: A parapet need not be provided on an exterior wall where any of the following conditions exist:

1. The wall is not required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Table 705.5 because of fire separation distance.

2. The building has an area of not more than 100 m \( ^{2} \)  on any floor.

3. Walls that terminate at roofs of not less than 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction or where the roof, including the deck or slab and supporting construction, is constructed entirely of noncombustible materials.
4. One-hour fire-resistance-rated exterior walls that terminate at the underside of the roof sheathing, deck or slab, provided that:

4.1. Where the roof/ceiling framing elements are parallel to the walls, such framing and elements supporting such framing shall not be of less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction for a width of 1.2 m for Groups R and U and 3 m for other occupancies, measured from the interior side of the wall.

4.2. Where roof/ceiling framing elements are not parallel to the wall, the entire span of such framing and elements supporting such framing shall not be of less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

4.3. Openings in the roof shall not be located within 1.5 meter of the 1-hour fire-resistance-rated exterior wall for Groups R and U and 3 m for other occupancies, measured from the interior side of the wall.

4.4. The entire building shall be provided with not less than a Class B roof covering.

5. In Groups R-2 and R-3 where the entire building is provided with a Class C roof covering, the exterior wall shall be permitted to terminate at the underside of the roof sheathing or deck in Types III, IV and V construction, provided that one or both of the following criteria is met:

5.1. The roof sheathing or deck is constructed of approved noncombustible materials or of fire-retardant-treated wood for a distance of 1.2 m.

5.2. The roof is protected with 16 mm Type X gypsum board directly beneath the underside of the roof sheathing or deck, supported by not less than nominal 50 mm ledgers attached to the sides of the roof framing members for a minimum distance of 1.2 m.

6. Where the wall is permitted to have not less than 25 percent of the exterior wall areas containing unprotected openings based on fire separation distance as determined in accordance with Section 705.8.

Parapets are required to restrict spread of fire from building to building and are therefore a function of the FSD. Parapets are not required to extend above the roofs on all buildings.

===== Page 0553 =====
There are six exceptions. Exceptions 1 and 6 apply to all buildings.

Exception 1 exempts exterior walls with a 9 m or greater FSD for all types of construction except Types IIB and VB. Exterior walls of Types IIB and VB (except for H occupancy) with greater than 3 m of FSD are exempt from parapets. Exception 1 applies to bearing and nonload-bearing walls and would also exempt bearing walls from parapets if the bearing wall was not required to have a fire-resistance rating by Table 705.5, even if said bearing wall was required to have a fire-resistance rating by Table 601.

Exception 6 exempts all sprinkled buildings from parapet walls where the exterior walls have an FSD of 1.5 m or greater. Exception 6 exempts all non-sprinklered buildings from parapets with an FSD of 4.5 m or greater. Exception 6 is the greater exemption for all but Type IIB and VB non sprinkled buildings, when Exception 1 is better. These two exceptions yield the following:

Parapet walls are not required on sprinkled buildings with an FSD of 1.5 m or greater.

Parapet walls are not required for Nonsprinklered Type IIB and VB construction with an FSD of 3 m or more.

Parapet walls are not required for Nonsprinklered buildings of all types of construction other than Types IIB and VB with an FSD of 4.5 m or more.

Exception 2 exempts buildings with 100 m² or less on any floor.

Exceptions 3, 4 and 5. While Exceptions 1, 2 and 6 completely exempt the exterior walls from parapets, Exceptions 3, 4 and 5 deal with special credit for the roof construction.

Exceptions 3, 4 and 5 require the exterior walls to extend to the roof deck or underside of roof sheathing and require special attention to the roof construction to eliminate the need for the parapet extension, thus they are not subject to any FSD requirements and can have an FSD of zero. Exceptions 1, 2 and 6 simply exempt the walls from extending above the roof without any special roof construction and do not require that the walls must extend to the roof deck.

705.11.1 Parapet construction. Parapets shall have the same fire-resistance rating as that required for the supporting wall, and on any side adjacent to a roof surface, shall have noncombustible faces for the uppermost 450 mm, including counterflashing and coping materials. The height of the parapet shall be not less than 750 mm above the point where the roof surface and the wall intersect. Where the roof slopes toward a parapet at a slope greater than 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (16.7-percent slope), the parapet shall extend to the same height as any portion of the roof within a fire separation distance where protection of wall openings is required, but the height shall be not less than 750 mm.

Parapet wall construction shall be of combustible or noncombustible material depending on the exterior wall requirements of the type of construction and shall be of fire-resistance-rated construction as required for the exterior wall. The interior wall covering facing the roof, including the flashing, shall be noncombustible to a height of 450 mm above the roof. The required height of the parapet shall be 750 mm above the roof surface unless the roof slopes upward away from the wall on a pitch of 2 in 12 or greater. In some cases, the last part of this section requires a higher parapet, depending on the FSD. When the slope of the roof is over 2 in 12, the parapet shall extend to a height equal to the height of the roof at the point determined as follows:

In a non-sprinklered building, Table 705.8 requires protected openings for any FSD between 900 mm and 1.5 m. Therefore, the height of the roof at the 1.5 m FSD is the height to which the parapet wall extension must extend but must always extend at least 750 mm above the roof at the exterior wall. For a non-sprinklered building, the height of the roof at the plane where protected openings are required according to Table 705.8 is the height at 1.5 m from the common lot line or assumed property line. See Commentary Figure 705.11.1(1).

For a sprinklered building, Table 705.8 never requires protected openings. Therefore, for a sprinklered building the parapet need only extend 750 mm above the roof, regardless of the slope of the roof or the FSD. See Commentary Figure 705.11.1(2).

## SECTION 706 FIRE WALLS

706.1 General. Fire walls shall be constructed in accordance with Sections 706.2 through 706.11. The extent and location of such fire walls shall provide a complete separation. Where a fire wall separates occupancies that are required to be separated by a fire barrier wall, the most restrictive requirements of each separation shall apply.

Fire walls serve to create separate buildings for purposes of allowable area, allowable height and type of construction requirements (see the definition of "Area, building" in Section 202). Using these provisions to control other building

===== Page 0554 =====
features or elements such as means of egress, building systems or building utilities is not intended or implied by the provisions. Because of the special allowances for allowable areas, a fire wall must provide a higher level of fire safety, continuity and structural integrity than other types of fire-resistance-rated walls. When the designer utilizes a fire wall, he or she must design the fire wall to meet this section. It is not intended that fire walls can be provided in the horizontal plane to create separate buildings. Fire walls cannot be utilized to increase the allowable building height. However, offsetting two vertical Sections of fire wall is permissible as long as the required fire-resistance rating and structural stability are maintained.

706.1.1 Party walls. Any wall located on a lot line between adjacent buildings, which is used or adapted for joint service between the two buildings, shall be constructed as a fire wall in accordance with Section 706. Party walls shall be constructed without openings and shall create separate buildings.

## Exceptions:

1. Openings in a party wall separating an anchor building and a mall shall be in accordance with Section 402.4.2.2.1.

2. Party walls and fire walls are not required on lot lines dividing a building for ownership purposes where the aggregate height and area of the portions of the building located on both sides of the lot line do not exceed the maximum height and area requirements of this code. For the building official's review and approval, the official shall be provided with copies of dedicated access easements and contractual agreements that permit the owners of portions of the building located on either side of the lot line access to the other side for purposes of maintaining fire and life safety systems necessary for the operation of the building.

A party wall is a fire wall on an interior lot line, adapted for joint use by both buildings. It is distinguished from other fire walls in that it is on the property line and serves to separate buildings usually owned by two separate parties. When two separate structures are built up to the property line, the designer has the option of using two separate exterior walls with zero FSD or a party wall. Since there is a real property line involved, the prohibition for openings between the two buildings is important and even utilities cannot penetrate the party wall. Unlike fire walls in other buildings, which can have openings in them, party walls cannot have any openings in them (see Section 706.8 for opening limits on other fire walls).

Exception 1 allowing openings is important since many anchor stores are actually owned by the major department store while the mall is owned by a separate entity. The fact that there is a real property line at the separation walls between an anchor and a mall means that technically there is a party wall, but openings are normally present and a necessary function of the mall and anchor.

Exception 2 is intended to recognize that it is increasingly common to have property subdivided with a lot line dividing a building for ownership purposes. This issue is similar to that for malls and anchor stores as discussed in Exception 1.

This Section specifies that where a property line divides a building for ownership purposes, and the building portions on both sides of the line do not exceed the maximum height and area requirements of the code, a fire wall is not required to be constructed on the property line. This allowance is only permitted where copies of dedicated access easements and contractual agreements allowing for maintenance of required fire and life safety systems that straddle the separation wall be provided to the building official. This Section is intended to provide guidance to ensure consistency in application of the code to buildings divided by ownership lot lines.

706.2 Structural stability. Fire walls shall be designed and constructed to allow collapse of the structure on either side without collapse of the wall under fire conditions. Fire walls designed and constructed in accordance with NFPA 221 shall be deemed to comply with this section.

Exception: In Seismic Design Categories D through F, where double fire walls are used in accordance with NFPA 221, floor and roof sheathing not exceeding 19 mm thickness shall be permitted to be continuous through the wall assemblies of light frame construction.

Since the collapse of one building from fire conditions should not cause the collapse of an adjacent building, a fire wall is required to be capable of withstanding the collapse of the construction on either side of the wall under fire conditions. An exception to the provision is found in Exception 5 to Section 706.6. In this situation, the issue of structural stability would still apply if the fire was in the buildings located above the horizontal separation required in Section 509.2 Item 1. However, it would clearly be impossible for the buildings above the

===== Page 0555 =====
separation or, for that matter, the fire wall to be able to withstand the collapse of the building beneath it. Since the building below is of Type IA construction and the separation has a 3-hour fire-resistance rating, this should not be a problem. See 706.6, Exception 5, regarding fire walls in this situation.

There are various methods of designing and constructing fire walls for structural stability during a fire. Among the systems used are cantilevered or freestanding walls, laterally supported and tied walls, and double wall construction. For masonry walls, the NCMA TEK Bulletin 5-8B contains helpful information. For an example using a masonry fire wall, see Commentary Figure 706.2(1). The Gypsum Association's Fire Resistance Design Manual contains construction details for area separation walls (party wall/fire walls) which have been accepted as fire walls. For an example of a gypsum board fire wall, see Commentary Figure 706.2(2).

The collapse of structural members at some distance from the wall can generally be ignored, but the structural members that are supported by the wall or that are attached directly to the wall for lateral support do require special attention.

Double fire walls shall be assumed to have the required structural stability if they are constructed in accordance with NFPA 221. NFPA 221 covers more than double fire walls, but SBC 201 only references it for double fire walls.

The exception recognizes a widely accepted interpretation by many building departments and structural engineers that the roof and floor diaphragms must be continuous to properly perform its function. The sheathing which comprises these diaphragms in light frame construction is generally wood structural panels between 11 mm and 18 mm thickness. These panels represent a very small risk of causing failure of the wall on the unaffected side of a double fire wall assembly. The benefit of performing the seismic function as a diaphragm is generally regarded as well worth any very small risk caused by fire exposure from one side of a double fire wall.

706.3 Materials. Fire walls shall be of any approved noncombustible materials.

Exception: Buildings of Type V construction.

This section requires that fire walls be constructed of noncombustible materials unless both buildings are of Type V (combustible) construction. This is consistent with the provisions of Section 602, which require exterior walls of buildings of Type I, II, III and IV to be built of noncombustible construction, while buildings of Type V construction are permitted to be built of combustible exterior walls.

706.4 Fire-resistance rating. Fire walls shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that required by Table 706.4.

The required fire-resistance rating must comply with the more restrictive occupancy of Table 706.4. For example, if two buildings of Type II construction with occupancies in Groups S1 and B are built of any construction type and separated by a fire wall, the fire wall is required to have a fire-resistance rating of 3 hours (in accordance with Table 706.4 based on Group S1). The provisions of Section 706.1 should also be reviewed when determining the required fire-resistance rating. If the occupancies involved require a separation, or are not permitted in a mixed occupancy building, then the most restrictive requirement between that and the fire wall provisions will apply.

The fire-resistance ratings represent a relationship between the fuel load and an exposure to fire severity that is equivalent to the standard time-temperature curve. The relationship is based on a number of full-scale fire tests by the U.S. Department of Commerce's National Bureau of Standards (NBS) conducted in the 1920s to determine how actual building fires compared with the temperatures represented by the standard time-temperature curve (see commentary, Section 703.2).

An analysis of tests documented by S.H. Ingberg indicates that the weight per square meter of ordinary combustibles, such as wood and paper, with a heat of combustion of 16,282 to 18,608 kJ/kg, is related to hourly fire severity as described in Commentary Figure 706.4(1). By comparing Table 706.4 to Commentary Figure 706.4(2), it shows that the table is not based solely on the average fuel load of the occupancy. Not only are other factors, such as occupant density and evacuation capability, incorporated into the required fire-resistance rating, but it must also be recognized that fuel loads in a building are not evenly distributed. For example, the average fuel load for occupancy in Group B may be 25 to 50 kg/m². The fuel load in file and storage rooms, however, may be 50 to 100 kg/m². While other sections of the code may address these areas by mandating an automatic fire suppression system with a partition capable of resisting the passage of smoke or a fire-resistance-rated enclosure of the incidental use area, the potential for higher fuel loads is also factored into determining the required fire-resistance rating.

===== Page 0556 =====
The minimum fire-resistance ratings required in Table 706.4 generally correlate with the fire-resistance ratings required by Table 508.4 However, Table 706.4 contains provisions that acknowledge the need for more conservative ratings for fire walls due to their unique role in creating separate buildings.

Note a allows a reduction in the fire-resistance rating of the fire walls in buildings of Type II or V construction. For instance, the fire-resistance rating of a fire wall separating a Type II building from a Type V building can be only 2 hours. If the buildings on both sides of the fire wall are Type II construction, the same reduction is allowed. If the buildings on both sides of the fire wall are Type V construction, the same reduction is allowed. If the building on either side of the fire wall is of another type of construction than Type II or V, the greater fire-resistance rating is required.

Due to the unique nature of the hazards presented by occupancies of Groups H-1, H-2 and H-3, Table 706.4 includes Note b, which references Sections 415.7 and 415.8 for specific requirements relative to the construction of such buildings (see commentary, Sections 415.7 and 415.8).

706.5 Horizontal continuity. Fire walls shall be continuous from exterior wall to exterior wall and shall extend not less than 450 mm beyond the exterior surface of exterior walls.

## Exceptions:

1. Fire walls shall be permitted to terminate at the interior surface of combustible exterior sheathing or siding provided the exterior wall has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour for a horizontal distance of not less than 1.2 m on both sides of the fire wall. Openings within such exterior walls shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than  \( \frac{3}{4} \)  hour.

2. Fire walls shall be permitted to terminate at the interior surface of noncombustible exterior sheathing, exterior siding or other noncombustible exterior finishes provided that the sheathing, siding or other exterior noncombustible finish extends a horizontal distance of not less than 1.2 m on both sides of the fire wall.

3. Fire walls shall be permitted to terminate at the interior surface of noncombustible exterior sheathing where the building on each side of the fire wall is protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
Historically, the codes have addressed the hazards of fire exposure at the fire wall from only a vertical perspective; namely, at the roof (see Section 706.6). Section 706.5 addresses a similar fire hazard concern from the horizontal perspective; namely, at the intersection of the fire wall and the exterior wall. The 450 mm extension is intended to abate the potential for fire to travel from one building to the other around the fire wall. The 450 mm extension is required to extend the full height of the fire wall. The three exceptions acknowledge the effect certain types of construction will have on fire breaching the exterior wall and exposing the adjacent building. Specifically, fire-resistance-rated construction (see Exception 1), noncombustible finish materials (see Exception 2) and noncombustible sheathing materials coupled with sprinkler protection (see Exception 3) provide the necessary barrier to limit fire spread across the exterior surface. The difference between Exceptions 2 and 3 is that Exception 2 would not permit a combustible exterior finish to be placed over the noncombustible exterior wall construction, while Exception 3 would allow a combustible exterior finish, provided the building is sprinkled with either an NFPA 13 or 13R system.

706.5.1 Exterior walls. Where the fire wall intersects exterior walls, the fire-resistance rating and opening protection of the exterior walls shall comply with one of the following:

1 The exterior walls on both sides of the fire wall shall have a 1-hour fire-resistance rating with  \( \frac{3}{4} \)  hour protection where opening protection is required by Section 705.8. The fire-resistance rating of the exterior wall shall extend not less than 1.2 m on each side of the intersection of the fire wall to exterior wall. Exterior wall intersections at fire walls that form an angle equal to or greater than 180 degrees do not need exterior wall protection.

2 Buildings or spaces on both sides of the intersecting fire wall shall assume to have an imaginary lot line at the fire wall and extending beyond the exterior of the fire wall. The location of the assumed line in relation to the exterior walls and the fire wall shall be such that the exterior wall and opening protection meet the requirements set forth in Sections 705.5 and 705.8. Such protection is not required for exterior walls terminating at fire walls that form an angle equal to or greater than 180 degrees.

===== Page 0557 =====
This section deals only with fire walls that terminate at an exterior wall that does not continue in the same horizontal plane but the exterior walls on each side of the fire wall form an angle of less than 180 degrees. For example, the required fire wall may end at an inside corner of an L-shaped building. Should this occur, not only does Section 705.6 apply, but this section has extra requirements to mitigate the exterior wall fire exposure from one building to another. This section states two methods of complying. See Commentary Figure 706.5.1(1), Figure 706.5.1(2) and Figure 706.5.1(3).

706.5.2 Horizontal projecting elements. Fire walls shall extend to the outer edge of horizontal projecting elements such as balconies, roof overhangs, canopies, marquees and similar projections that are within 1.2 m of the fire wall.

Exceptions:

1. Horizontal projecting elements without concealed spaces, provided that the exterior wall behind and below the projecting element has not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction for a distance not less than the depth of the projecting element on both sides of the fire wall. Openings within such exterior walls shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than  \( \frac{3}{4} \)  hour.

2. Noncombustible horizontal projecting elements with concealed spaces, provided a minimum 1-hour fire-resistance-rated wall extends through the concealed space. The projecting element shall be separated from the building by not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction for a distance on each side of the fire wall equal to the depth of the projecting element. The wall is not required to extend under the projecting element where the building exterior wall is not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated for a distance on each side of the fire wall equal to the depth of the projecting element. Openings within such exterior walls shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than  \( \frac{3}{4} \)  hour.

3. For combustible horizontal projecting elements with concealed spaces, the fire wall need only extend through the concealed space to the outer edges of the projecting elements. The exterior wall behind and below the projecting element shall be of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction for a distance not less than the depth of the projecting elements on both sides of the fire wall. Openings within such exterior walls shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire-protection rating of not less than  \( \frac{3}{4} \)  hour.

Fire walls are typically used to reduce the building area for the purpose of code compliance. However, many structures divided by fire walls are still detailed as a contiguous structure with projecting elements located on the exterior wall that extend across the fire wall. These projecting elements represent a potential conduit for fire to be transferred from one side of the building to the other side of the building. Even if the projecting elements are terminated at a distance in close proximity to the fire wall, the potential for fire spread to the adjacent projecting element still exists. In this section, 1.2 m (measured from the fire wall) is considered the appropriate threshold.

This section requires the fire wall to extend to the outer edge of the projecting element when such an element is located within 1.2 m of the fire wall. For example, in a contiguous residential structure with interior lot lines and fire walls or party walls between each dwelling unit, and where balconies are located within 1.2 m of the party or fire wall, then the fire/wall must be extended to the outer edge of the balcony or to a point in line with the outer edge of the balcony.

Exception 1 acknowledges the reduction in hazard due to the lack of a concealed space crossing the fire wall. However, since the projecting element provides a connection between the buildings, there is still a potential for fire to transfer across the wall, thus the need for a rated exterior wall separation between the inside of the building and the projection. Exceptions 2 and 3 address projecting elements with concealed spaces of noncombustible and combustible construction, respectively.

706.6 Vertical continuity. Fire walls shall extend from the foundation to a termination point not less than 750 mm above both adjacent roofs.

Exceptions:

1. Stepped buildings in accordance with Section 706.6.1.

2. Two-hour fire-resistance-rated walls shall be permitted to terminate at the underside of the roof sheathing, deck or slab, provided:

2.1. The lower roof assembly within 1.2 m of the wall has not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating and the entire

===== Page 0558 =====
length and span of supporting elements for the rated roof assembly has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.

2.2. Openings in the roof shall not be located within 1.2 m) of the fire wall.

2.3. Each building shall be provided with not less than a Class B roof covering.

3. Walls shall be permitted to terminate at the underside of noncombustible roof sheathing, deck or slabs where both buildings are provided with not less than a Class B roof covering. Openings in the roof shall not be located within 1.2 m of the fire wall.

4. In buildings of Types III, IV and V construction, walls shall be permitted to terminate at the underside of combustible roof sheathing or decks, provided that all of the following requirements are met:

4.1. Roof openings are not less than 1.2 m from the fire wall.

4.2. The roof is covered with a minimum Class B roof covering.

4.3. The roof sheathing or deck is constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood for a distance of 1.2 m on both sides of the wall or the roof is protected with 16 mm Type X gypsum board directly beneath the underside of the roof sheathing or deck, supported by not less than 50 mm nominal ledgers attached to the sides of the roof framing members for a distance of not less than 1.2 m on both sides of the fire wall.

5. In buildings designed in accordance with Section 510.2, fire walls located above the 3-hour horizontal assembly required by Section 510.2, Item 1 shall be permitted to extend from the top of this horizontal assembly.

6. Buildings with sloped roofs in accordance with Section 706.6.2.

One of the primary purposes of a fire wall is to provide protection from an exposure fire. A fire wall must be continuous from the foundation to or through the roof. The fire wall is required to extend to 750 mm above the roof surface (see Commentary Figure 706.6 for a diagram of a typical fire wall). Where other provisions are met that will restrict the spread of fire, this 750 mm extension is not required (see Exceptions 1 through 5). Exception 1 stipulates that fire walls separating two buildings that have different roof levels must comply with the provisions of Section 706.6.1.
Exception 2 to this section's requirement for a parapet applies to buildings where: a. The maximum required fire-resistance rating of the fire wall is 2 hours, b. The roof assembly located within 1.2 m of the fire wall has a minimum fire-resistance rating of 1 hour (including all supporting elements and structural members); c. No roof openings are located within 1.2 m of the fire wall; and d. The buildings on either side of the fire wall have a minimum Class B roof covering. The provisions of Exception 2 are not applicable to buildings with combustible roof construction where a fire wall is required to have a fire-resistance rating of 3 hours or greater. Buildings where the fire wall is required to have a 3-hour or greater fire-resistance rating must comply with the general provisions of Section 706.6, or with Exception 3 or 4 in order to qualify for the parapet extension exception.

Exception 3 states that, since the intent of the parapet is to prevent fire spread over the roof, it is not required if the entire roof is of noncombustible construction; the fire wall is continuous to the underside of the roof deck, roof slab or roof sheathing; the roof-covering material has a minimum Class B classification in accordance with the provisions of Section 1505.3 (see commentary, Section 1505.3); and there are no roof openings located within 1.2 m on either side of the fire wall.

The intent of the requirement for a Class B roof covering is due to the fact that roof coverings are not considered part of the roof, and therefore, are not subject to the noncombustibility requirements of this section. This Section requires that the roof covering be effective against moderate fire test exposure to reduce the potential for fire spread across the roof. The restriction on the location of roof openings is intended to minimize the potential of the spread of fire from one building to an adjacent building via roof openings, such as skylights, penetrations or roof windows. This fire spread could occur from something such as a fan that breaches the roof opening in the involved building and exposes roof openings in the adjacent building to direct fire or to burning brands, which could land on the roof, burn through the roof opening and ignite combustibles in the interior of the adjacent building. The 1.2 m threshold provides a reasonable approximation of a fire plume, beyond which the exposure to fire of the adjacent building is reduced. Exception 4 to the requirement in Section 706.6 for a parapet is the condition in buildings of Type III, IV and V construction where the sheathing or deck is constructed of noncombustible materials or approved fire-retardant-treated wood for a

===== Page 0559 =====
distance of 1.2 m on both sides of the wall (see the commentary to Section 2303.2 for additional information on fire-retardant-treated wood) or where the prescribed application of 16 mm Type X gypsum board is applied to the underside of the deck for a distance of 1200 mm on both sides of the wall. The roof coverings on both buildings must have a minimum Class B rating and no roof openings are to be located within 1.2 m of the fire wall. The intent is the same: to resist the passage of flame beyond the fire wall.

706.6.1 Stepped buildings. Where a fire wall also serves as an exterior wall for a building and separates buildings having different roof levels, such wall shall terminate at a point not less than 750 mm above the lower roof level. Exterior walls above the fire wall extending more than 750 mm above the lower roof shall be of not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction from both sides with openings protected by fire assemblies having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour. Portions of the exterior walls greater than 4.5 m above the lower roof shall be of nonfire-resistance-rated construction unless otherwise rated construction is required by other provisions of this code.
Exception: A fire wall serving as part of an exterior wall that separates buildings having different roof levels shall be permitted to terminate at the underside of the roof sheathing, deck or slab of the lower roof, provided that Items 1, 2 and 3 are met. The exterior wall above the fire wall is not required to be of fire-resistance-rated construction unless required by other provisions of this code.

1 The lower roof assembly within 3 m of the firewall has not less than a 1-hour fire-resistance rating.

2 The entire length and span of supporting elements for the rated roof assembly shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.

3 Openings in the lower roof shall not be located within 3 m of the fire wall.

The basic provisions of Section 706.6 require that a parapet extend a minimum of 750 mm above the roof surfaces on both sides of the fire wall, which would then require fire walls separating buildings with different roof heights to extend 750 mm above the highest roof surface. The provisions of Section 706.6.1 address situations where a fire wall separates adjacent buildings with a difference in roof height. These provisions acknowledge that fire exposure to the exterior wall of an adjacent building from the roof of a lower building represents, to a certain extent, a reduced hazard.

This Section retains the fire wall extension above the lower roof surface and places a 4500 mm limit on rated wall construction and opening protectives, while the exception allows the fire wall extension to be eliminated as long as a fire barrier, in the form of 1-hour-rated roof construction, is provided that extends a minimum of 3000 mm from the fire wall.

The option provided by this Section permits openings in an exterior wall that extend above the fire wall, where the fire wall extends 750 mm above the lower roof surface, and the exterior wall extending above the fire wall is constructed as a 1-hour fire-resistance-rated wall rated for exposure from both sides for a distance of 4.5 m above the lower roof surface.

Where the fire wall and exterior wall comply with these requirements, openings are permitted in the exterior wall extension, provided that all openings located within 4500 mm of the lower roof surface are protected with 3/4-hour-rated opening protectives. Openings located more than 4500 mm above the lower roof surface are not required to have opening protectives [see Commentary Figure 706.6.1(1)]. The provisions of this Section are similar to those contained in Section 704.10 for vertical exposure of exterior openings. They require that when the difference in height between the roof surfaces of the adjacent buildings is less than 4500 mm, the exterior wall extension is required to extend to the underside of the upper roof deck [see Commentary Figure 706.6.1(2)]. The exception permits openings in the roof that extend above the fire wall, where: a. The fire wall terminates at the bottom of the roof deck of the lower roof, b. The lower roof assembly has a minimum 1-hour fire-resistance rating for a minimum distance of 3000 mm from the fire wall; and c. There are no openings located in the lower roof within 3000 mm of the fire wall. Openings located in the exterior wall above the lower roof surface are not required to have opening protectives [see Commentary Figure 706.6.1(3)]. It must be noted that all structural elements, including beams, columns and bearing walls that provide support for the fire-resistance-rated roof assembly, must also have a 1-hour fire-resistance rating for their entire length or span in order to maintain the effectiveness of the rated roof assembly. The provisions of this Section are similar to those contained in Section 1023.7 for the protection of the exterior walls of exit stairways. The provisions for stepped buildings only apply where a fire wall is required in between the

===== Page 0560 =====
buildings and do not apply to party walls on real property lines.

706.6.2 Buildings with sloped roofs. Where a fire wall serves as an interior wall for a building, and the roof on one side or both sides of the fire wall slopes toward the fire wall at a slope greater than 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (2:12), the fire wall shall extend to a height equal to the height of the roof located 1200 mm from the fire wall plus 750 mm. The extension of the fire wall shall be not less than 750 mm.

This requirement is similar to that of stepped buildings. This Section only applies if the roof slopes upward away from the fire wall at a slope greater than two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (2:12). The sloping roof presents a greater hazard to the building from fire exposure on either side than a roof at the same elevation on each side. The hazard would increase as the slope of the roof increases. Commentary Figure 706.6.2 illustrates this requirement. This Section requires the extension above the roof regardless of the material of the roof construction on either side. For roofs sloping two units vertical in 12 units horizontal (2:12), fire wall extensions need only comply with Section 706.6. Section 706.6 may require a 750 mm height extension or may allow the fire wall to terminate at the roof deck under the conditions of one of the exceptions in Section 706.6.

706.7 Combustible framing in fire walls. Adjacent combustible members entering into a concrete or masonry fire wall from opposite sides shall not have less than a 100 mm distance between embedded ends. Where combustible members frame into hollow walls or walls of hollow units, hollow spaces shall be solidly filled for the full thickness of the wall and for a distance not less than 100 mm above, below and between the structural members, with noncombustible materials approved for fireblocking.

In order to retain the fire-resistance capability of the wall where combustible members will frame into it, hollow walls or walls of hollow units must be solidly filled for the thickness of the wall and for a distance of not less than 100 mm above, below and between the structural members. Consistent with the construction of the walls, the fire blocking materials are to be noncombustible and approved for fire blocking in accordance with Section 717.2. If combustible members enter both sides of a fire wall, there must be at least 100 mm of masonry between the embedded ends.

In order to maintain structural integrity where wood beams or joists are supported in and on masonry fire walls, the joists and beams should be shaped so that they can rotate out of the pocket without exerting undue force on the wall.

706.8 Openings. Each opening through a fire wall shall be protected in accordance with Section 716 and shall not exceed 15 m². The aggregate width of openings at any floor level shall not exceed 25 percent of the length of the wall.

Exceptions:

1. Openings are not permitted in party walls constructed in accordance with Section 706.1.1.

2. Openings shall not be limited to 15 m² where both buildings are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.

In order to maintain the integrity of the fire wall, the maximum area and percent of openings in the wall are restricted. When provided, the openings must be properly protected so that the fire-resistance rating of the wall is maintained. This section prescribes the maximum area and the percent of openings that may be permitted in a fire wall at any one floor level. The provisions must be used in concert with Section 706.1.1, which limits openings for party walls. Fire wall openings have restrictive limitations in their size and total area because of the critical function that a fire wall serves. To maintain the required fire performance of the fire wall, each opening through a fire wall is restricted in area to 15 m² and the aggregate width of all openings at any one floor level may not constitute more than 25 percent of the length of the wall. The 15 m² limitation provides a reasonable size through which industrial machinery may pass and corresponds with the maximum area limitations of many tested fire doors.

Recognizing the effectiveness of automatic sprinklers, the 15 m \( ^{2} \)  opening limitation does not apply where the buildings on both sides of the fire wall are fully sprinkled (see Exception 2); however, the aggregate width of all openings in a fire wall at any one floor level is still limited to 25 percent of the length of the wall.

706.9 Penetrations. Penetrations of fire walls shall comply with Section 714.

In order to maintain the integrity of the required fire-resistance rating, penetrations through the fire wall must be properly protected. Acceptable protection methods for various penetrations of fire walls are identified in Sections 714.3 and 714.4.

706.10 Joints. Joints made in or between fire walls shall comply with Section 715.

===== Page 0561 =====
* Joints, such as expansion or seismic, are another form of openings in fire walls and, therefore, must be considered with regard to maintaining the fire-resistance ratings of fire walls. This section requires all joints that are located in fire walls to be protected by a joint system with a fire-resistance rating and to comply with the requirements of Section 715.

706.11 Ducts and air transfer openings. Ducts and air transfer openings shall not penetrate fire walls.

Exception: Penetrations by ducts and air transfer openings of fire walls that are not on a lot line shall be allowed provided that the penetrations comply with Section 717. The size and aggregate width of all openings shall not exceed the limitations of Section 706.8.

The general provisions of this section mirror those of Section 706.1.1 for party walls. The exception permits duct and transfer openings for fire walls not located on a lot line, provided the maximum aggregate area provisions of Section 706.8 are met and that the openings are protected in accordance with Section 717.

## SECTION 707 FIRE BARRIERS

707.1 General. Fire barriers installed as required elsewhere in this code or SBC 801 shall comply with this section.

The provisions of this section apply to assemblies that are required to have a fire-resistance rating and are required to be constructed as "fire barriers." As addressed in Section 707.3, fire barriers are used for separating exits, incidental use areas, shafts, hazardous materials control areas and fire areas. Fire barriers provide a higher degree of protection than fire partitions (see Section 708) but lack the inherent structural integrity of fire walls. Fire barriers limit the number of openings. Fire barrier wall assemblies must be continuous from the top of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling assembly to the bottom of the floor or roof slab/deck above. Unlike fire partitions, addressed in Section 708, there are no circumstances under which a fire barrier wall is permitted to terminate at a ceiling.

Fire barriers are used for a variety of purposes, such as mixed occupancies, shafts, exit access stairways and exit and floor opening enclosures. Fire barriers also include interior walls that serve to subdivide a space by separating one fire area from an adjacent fire area and for separating incidental use areas (see Section 509.4.1). Fire-resistance-rated assemblies used to separate exit access corridors in many applications as well as tenant, dwelling unit and guestroom separations are fire partitions (see Section 708). This Section provides minimum requirements for the fire-resistance rating, continuity, combustibility and protection of openings and penetrations in order to help maintain the reliability of the fire separation assembly. As with any fire-resistance-rated assembly, consideration must be given to the openings and penetrations that are provided within the assembly. The intent is to maintain the fire-resistance rating of the assembly. These Sections recognize that fire spread beyond a fire-resistance-rated compartment is often attributed to the protection given to any opening or penetration in the fire barrier, or the lack thereof.

Since the fire barrier is intended to provide a reliable subdivision of areas, the construction that structurally supports the assembly is required to provide at least the same hourly fire-resistance rating as the fire barrier. This is applicable regardless of the type of construction of the building. Structural stability is regulated by Section 707.5.

707.2 Materials. Fire barriers shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

The types of materials used in fire barriers are to be consistent with Sections 602 through 602.5 for the type of construction classification of the building. The fire-resistance ratings of fire barriers used to separate mixed occupancies are determined in accordance with Section 508.4 (see commentary, Section 508.4). Fire barriers are permitted to be of combustible materials in Type III, IV and V construction and are required to be of noncombustible materials in Type I and II construction.

707.3 Fire-resistance rating. The fire-resistance rating of fire barriers shall comply with this section.

The elements that are identified in this section must be constructed as required for fire barriers and must be fire-resistance rated as required by the code sections referenced in this section.

707.3.1 Shaft enclosures. The fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier separating building areas from a shaft shall comply with Section 713.4.

See Section 713.4 for the fire-resistance rating for shaft enclosures.

707.3.2 Interior exit stairway and ramp construction. The fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier separating building areas from an interior exit stairway or ramp shall comply with Section 1023.1.

See Section 1023.1 for the fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier separating building areas from interior exit stairways and ramps (vertical exit enclosures).

===== Page 0562 =====
707.3.3 Enclosures for exit access stairways. The fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier separating building areas from an exit access stairway or ramp shall comply with Section 713.4.

See Sections 1023 for the enclosure requirements for exit access stairways and ramps. Unlike exit stairway enclosures, there are numerous exceptions to the enclosure requirements in Section 1023.

707.3.4 Exit passageway. The fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier separating building areas from an exit passageway shall comply with Section 1024.3.

See Section 1024.3 for the fire-resistance rating for fire barriers forming exit passageways. Exit passageway enclosures may be fire barriers complying with this section or horizontal assemblies complying with Section 711.

707.3.5 Horizontal exit. The fire-resistance rating of the separation between building areas connected by a horizontal exit shall comply with Section 1026.1.

See Section 1026.1 of SBC 201 for the fire-resistance rating of the fire barriers forming horizontal exits. Horizontal exits may be formed by fire walls meeting Section 706, fire barriers complying with this section or horizontal assemblies complying with Section 1026.2 and 711.

707.3.6 Atriums. The fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier separating atriums shall comply with Section 404.6.

See Section 404.6 for the fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier walls separating the atrium area from other building use areas. Horizontal assemblies meeting Section 711 can also separate the atrium area.

707.3.7 Incidental uses. The fire barrier separating incidental uses from other spaces in the building shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that indicated in Table 509.1.

Table 509.1 states the fire-resistance requirements for fire barrier walls separating incidental use areas. For some incidental uses there is a sprinkler option in lieu of the fire-resistance-rated fire barrier wall. With the sprinkler option, the wall is not required to be fire-resistance rated but must be capable of resisting the passage of smoke. Those nonrated wall assemblies are not required to be constructed as fire barriers.

707.3.8 Control areas. Fire barriers separating control areas shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that required in Section 414.2.4.

Control areas refer to areas within a building where limited quantities of hazardous materials are stored or used. Section 414.2.4 references Table 414.2.2 for the design and number of control areas. The required fire-resistance rating for the fire barriers separating the control areas from the rest of the area is also found within the table.

707.3.9 Separated occupancies. Where the provisions of Section 508.4 are applicable, the fire barrier separating mixed occupancies shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that indicated in Table 508.4 based on the occupancies being separated.

Where separation of mixed occupancies is the chosen option for mixed uses in a building, the required fire separation is either a fire barrier meeting the requirements of this Section or a horizontal fire separation assembly meeting the requirements of Section 711 (see Section 508.4). The required fire-resistance rating for the fire barrier or horizontal assembly is found in Table 508.4. Note that if the occupancy separation wall also is used to separate fire areas, then Section 707.3.10 is also applicable.

707.3.10 Fire areas. The fire barriers, fire walls or horizontal assemblies, or combination thereof, separating a single occupancy into different fire areas shall have a fire resistance rating of not less than that indicated in Table 707.3.10. The fire barriers, fire walls or horizontal assemblies, or combination thereof, separating fire areas of mixed occupancies shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than the highest value indicated in Table 707.3.10 for the occupancies under consideration.

One of the alternatives available in addressing fire protection systems in many buildings is to divide the building into separate fire areas (see the definition of "Fire areas" in Chapter 2). Since many of the fire suppression system thresholds (see Section 903.2) are based on the fire area, separation of a single occupancy into small fire areas can be an acceptable method for avoiding the use of sprinklers. Note that fire walls, fire barriers and horizontal assemblies can separate fire areas. This is a classic type of design decision: sprinklers versus compartmentation. If the separation is provided in accordance with Table 707.3.10, each fire area may be evaluated separately for purposes of determining the applicable provisions of the code.

Areas separated with only fire barriers and horizontal assemblies are not considered separate buildings; they are considered separate fire areas. Two areas must be separated by a fire wall or exterior walls to be considered separate buildings. Two areas separated with fire barriers or horizontal assemblies are still considered as part of a single building. This distinction is critical in

===== Page 0563 =====
determining compliance with allowable height and area and other code provisions.

Table 707.3.10 provides the minimum required fire-resistance ratings of the fire wall, fire barrier or horizontal assembly separating two fire areas of the same occupancy group.

707.4 Exterior walls. Where exterior walls serve as a part of a required fire-resistance-rated shaft, or separation or enclosure for a stairway, ramp or exit passageway, such walls shall comply with the requirements of Section 705 for exterior walls and the fire-resistance-rated enclosure or separation requirements shall not apply.

## Exceptions:

1. Exterior walls required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Section 1021 for exterior egress balconies, Section 1023.7 for interior exit stairways and ramps, Section 1024.8 for exit passageways and Section 1027.6 for exterior exit stairways and ramp.

2. Exterior walls required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Section 1207 of SBC 801 for enclosure of energy storage systems.

If an area is required to be enclosed by fire barriers and an exterior wall constitutes part of the enclosure, the exterior wall is only required to comply with the fire-resistance-rating requirements in Section 705, unless the exterior wall is protecting part of an shaft separation, enclosure for a stairway or exit passageway (see commentary, Sections 1023.7 and 1027.6). The fire barrier requirements are intended to subdivide or enclose areas to protect them from a fire in the building. In general, the exterior wall only needs a fire-resistance rating if required for structural stability (see Table 601) or because of exterior exposure potential (see Section 705.5 and Table 705.5). Exception 1 points to four Sections of the code where the exterior wall must be rated for reasons other than the FSD.

Exception 2 addresses enclosure of energy storage systems. Battery storage systems, now referred to as energy storage systems, have historically been separated from other portions of an occupancy by 1-or 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction as an incidental use. The enclosure protects the general occupancy areas from an event involving the incidental use. One of the hazards of an energy storage system is thermal runaway leading to a fire event. These fire events can be significant and last several hours. The systems are required to be designed to prevent thermal runaway internally; however, thermal runaway can be
induced in some cases by an exterior event such as a damaging impact or fire exposure.
707.5 Continuity. Fire barriers shall extend from the top of the foundation or floor/ceiling assembly below to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, slab or deck above and shall be securely attached thereto. Such fire barriers shall be continuous through concealed space, such as the space above a suspended ceiling. Joints and voids at intersections shall comply with Sections 707.8 and 707.9.

## Exceptions:

1. Shaft enclosures shall be permitted to terminate at a top enclosure complying with Section 713.12.

2. Interior exit stairway and ramp enclosures required by Section 1023 and exit access stairway and ramp enclosures required by Section 1019 shall be permitted to terminate at a top enclosure complying with Section 713.12.

3. An exit passageway enclosure required by Section 1024.3 that does not extend to the underside of the roof sheathing, slab or deck above shall be enclosed at the top with construction of the same fire-resistance rating as required for the exit passageway.

To minimize the potential for fire spread from one area to another over a fire barrier wall, such fire barrier assemblies must be continuous from the fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling assembly below to the underside of the floor slab or roof deck above (see Commentary Figure 707.5). To maintain the efficiency of the fire barrier, it must be continuous through all concealed spaces (such as a space above a suspended ceiling), be constructed tight and securely attached to the underside of the floor slab or roof deck. The joint at the intersection of fire barrier walls and other fire barriers, the underside of fire-resistance-rated floors or roof decks, slabs, decks and exterior walls must be an approved fire-resistance joint system meeting ASTM E119 or UL 263.

Exception 1 is an exception to the continuity requirement for shaft enclosure walls. Exception 2 allows exit stair enclosures and exit access stairway enclosures to terminate at a top enclosure complying with Section 713.12. Exception 3 extends the same allowance in Exception 2 to exit passageways. Since exit passageways and interior exit stairways and ramps are all exit components, the allowance for a top enclosure applies to all of these components. The use of a fire-resistance-rated top enclosure for an exit passageway is commonly used as a means to allow

===== Page 0564 =====
mechanical, electrical and plumbing work to route above an exit enclosure.

707.5.1 Supporting construction. The supporting construction for a fire barrier shall be protected to afford the required fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier supported. Hollow vertical spaces within a fire barrier shall be fire blocked in accordance with Section 718.2 at every floor level.

## Exceptions:

1. The maximum required fire-resistance rating for assemblies supporting fire barriers separating tank storage as provided for in Section 415.9.1.2 shall be 2 hours, but not less than required by Table 601 for the building construction type.

2. Supporting construction for 1-hour fire barriers required by Table 509.1 in buildings of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction is not required to be fire-resistance rated unless required by other sections of this code.

In general, fire barriers must be supported by construction having an equivalent fire-resistance rating. If the supporting structure is a primary structural frame (see the definition in Chapter 2) and supports more than two stories in height, the fire-resistance rating for the supporting structure must be protected by the individual encasement method in Section 704.3. If the supporting members are a secondary structural member, then the supporting structure can be protected by a membrane as in Section 711 for horizontal assemblies. The intent of this requirement is to prevent the effectiveness of the assembly from being circumvented by a fire that threatens the supporting elements. The requirement for the supporting construction to be fire-resistance rated applies to buildings of all types of construction, even to buildings of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction for all fire barrier walls except those separating incidental use areas. Exception 1 is not an exception at all but a requirement that supporting structures for fire barriers separating flammable or combustible tank storage be 2-hour fire-resistance rated.

Exception 2 allows only incidental use area separation walls in Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction to be supported on non-fire-resistance-rated construction if no other code section requires the supporting elements to be fire-resistance rated.
therefore, must be fire blocked as specified in the last sentence of Section 707.5.1. Any hollow vertical spaces within fire barrier walls must be fireblocked in accordance with Section 718.2.

707.6 Openings. Openings in a fire barrier shall be protected in accordance with Section 716. Openings shall be limited to a maximum aggregate width of 25 percent of the length of the wall, and the maximum area of any single opening shall not exceed 15 m². Openings in enclosures for exit access stairways and ramps, interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways shall also comply with Sections 1019, 1023.4 and 1024.5, respectively.

## Exceptions:

1. Openings shall not be limited to  \( 15 \, m^{2} \)  where adjoining floor areas are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1

2. Openings shall not be limited to 15 m² or an aggregate width of 25 percent of the length of the wall where the opening protective is a fire door serving enclosures for exit access stairways and ramps, and interior exit stairways and ramps.

3. Openings shall not be limited to 15 m² or an aggregate width of 25 percent of the length of the wall where the opening protective has been tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 and has a minimum fire-resistance rating not less than the fire-resistance rating of the wall.

4. Fire window assemblies permitted in atrium separation walls shall not be limited to a maximum aggregate width of 25 percent of the length of the wall.

5. Openings shall not be limited to 15 m² or an aggregate width of 25 percent of the length of the wall where the opening protective is a fire door assembly in a fire barrier separating an enclosure for exit access stairways and ramps, and interior exit stairways and ramps from an exit passageway in accordance with Section 1023.3.1.

To function as intended, buildings must provide access into different building areas. This access requires openings within fire barriers. Section 707.6 defines what openings are permitted and how they have to be protected to maintain the integrity of the fire barrier. To maintain the viability of the fire barrier, the aggregate width of openings is restricted to a maximum of 25 percent of the length of the

===== Page 0565 =====
wall. This limitation is based on the fact that the criteria for opening protective do not include limitations on unexposed surface temperature or radiant heat transfer. Consistent with typical listing limitations, a single opening protective is limited to a maximum of 15 m². It should be noted, however, that certain opening protectives, such as fire windows, are often limited to much smaller areas per opening.

Traditionally, the limiting size on openings in fire-resistance-rated walls has been based on the maximum sizes identified in the fire door listings. The previous size limitation was 11 m² due to the limitations of such listings. In 2006, the code increased the maximum permitted size of an opening protective to 15 m² in a fire barrier, based on the current listing limitations of steel fire doors. The maximum length of any single opening is limited to 4050 mm for the same reason when used during the testing process.

The reference to Sections 1019, 1023.4 and 1024.5 specifies that in exit enclosures and exit passageways, only openings for the purpose of exiting from normally occupied spaces are permitted. Spaces that are not normally occupied, such as janitor closets or mechanical and electrical rooms, are not permitted to open directly into these protected exit systems since fire in those areas may produce large volumes of heat and smoke that could readily enter the exit enclosure and delay or prevent egress. In order to maintain the required fire-resistance rating of the assembly, opening protectives must have a fire protection rating in accordance with Section 716. The reference to Section 716 is intended to identify the required fire protection rating for the opening protective, as indicated in Table 716.1(2), installation requirements and the applicable test standards.

Openings in fire barriers are not limited to 15 m² when all fire areas separated by the assembly are equipped throughout with automatic sprinkler protection (see Exception 1). This exception is similar to the one made for fire walls (see Section 706.8), based on the historical fire record of automatic sprinkler systems. Although the openings in the fire barrier are not limited in size under this exception, they are still required to be protected by opening protectives that meet the requirements of Section 716.

Exception 2 acknowledges the practicality of the 25-percent limitation for walls enclosing interior exit stairways and ramps, and exit access stairways and ramps. Most exit enclosures are of such limited size that the placement of the fire door in the wall of the enclosure often exceeds 25 percent of the wall.
Exception 3 addresses new opening protective products that have been tested to the more rigorous provisions of ASTM E119 or UL 263 rather than, or in addition to, the opening protective standard NFPA 252 or UL 10C. Since the opening protective has been tested to the same standard as the wall itself, it is then logical to allow such an opening protective without restrictions (see commentary, Section 703.6).

Exception 4 acknowledges the inclusive requirements for openings into atriums addressed in Section 404 that include glazing material allowances not found elsewhere in Chapter 7.

Exception 5 is similar to Exception 2 in that the wall area between the exit enclosure and the exit passageway is usually so very small that the door opening will nearly always exceed the 25-percent limitation.

707.7 Penetrations. Penetrations of fire barriers shall comply with Section 714.

In order to maintain the integrity of the fire barrier, penetrations into and through the fire-resistance-rated wall must be properly protected. Acceptable methods for various penetrations of fire barriers are identified in Section 714.4. The provisions of Section 707.7.1 must be used when the penetration is into an exit enclosure or exit passageway.

707.7.1 Prohibited penetrations. Penetrations into enclosures for exit access stairways and ramps, interior exit stairways and ramps, and exit passageways shall be allowed only where permitted by Sections 1019, 1023.5 and 1024.6, respectively.

This section reminds the code user that although the penetration firestop systems do provide protection for the penetration, the code prohibits most penetrations through exit enclosures. Only penetrations of items such as sprinkler piping, necessary ductwork for stair pressurization, and electrical conduit that serve the exit enclosure are allowed. There can never be a penetration through a fire barrier that separates an adjacent exit enclosure.

707.8 Joints. Joints made in or between fire barriers, and joints made at the intersection of fire barriers with underside of a fire-resistance-rated floor or roof sheathing, slab or deck above, and the exterior vertical wall intersection shall comply with Section 715.

This section contains requirements for joints or linear openings created between building assemblies, which are sometimes referred to as construction, expansion or seismic joints. These joints are most often created where the structural design of a building necessitates a separation between building components in order to accommodate anticipated structural

===== Page 0566 =====
displacements caused by thermal expansion and contraction, seismic activity, wind or other loads. Commentary Figure 715.1 illustrates some of the most common locations of these joints.

These linear openings create a “weak link” in fire-resistance-rated assemblies, which can compromise the integrity of the tested assembly by allowing an avenue for the passage of fire and the products of combustion through the assembly. In order to maintain the efficacy of the fire-resistance-rated assembly, these openings must be protected by a joint system with a fire-resistance rating equal to the adjacent assembly. It is not the intent of this section to regulate joints installed in assemblies that are provided to control shrinkage cracking, such as a saw cut control joint in concrete (see Section 715).

707.9 Voids at intersections. The voids created at the intersection of a fire barrier and a nonfire-resistance-rated roof assembly, or a nonfire-resistance-rated exterior wall assembly shall be filled. An approved material or system shall be used to fill the void and shall be securely installed in or on the intersection for its entire length so as not to dislodge, loosen or otherwise impair its ability to accommodate expected building movements and to retard the passage of fire and hot gases.

This new section is meant to give some prescriptive requirements for the joint formed by the intersection of a fire barrier wall and a non-fire-resistance-rated roof or wall assembly. Fire barrier walls are required to extend vertically to the roof deck. Fire barriers may also need to extend horizontally to an exterior wall. The method of sealing the resulting joint is pre-scribed in this section. Unlike a joint formed by a fire barrier wall and a fire-resistance-rated roof, which requires a joint meeting the test criteria of ASTM E1966 or UL 2079, this joint or void must only be filled with a material approved by the building official. It is not the intent of this section to require any performance-based tested assembly.

707.10 Ducts and air transfer openings. Penetrations in a fire barrier by ducts and air transfer openings shall comply with Section 717.

Section 717 details the protection of ducts and air transfer openings at the point where they penetrate a fire-resistance-rated assembly. Section 717.5 indicates which situations will require the installation of a damper. As stated in Section 717.1.2, if a duct does not require a damper, the penetration of that duct through a fire-resistance-rated assembly must be protected as a through penetration in accordance with Section 714.

## SECTION 708 FIRE PARTITIONS

708.1 General. The following wall assemblies shall comply with this section.

1 Separation walls as required by Section 420.2 for Group I-1 and Group R occupancies.

2 Walls separating tenant spaces in covered and open mall buildings as required by Section 402.4.2.1.

3 Corridor walls as required by Section 1020.3

4 Elevator lobby separation as required by Section 3006.3.

5 Egress balconies as required by Section 1021.2.

6 Walls separating ambulatory care facilities from adjacent spaces, corridors or tenants as required by Section 422.2.

7 Walls separating dwelling and sleeping units in Groups R-1 and R-2 in accordance with Sections 907.2.8.1 and 907.2.9.1.

8 Vestibules in accordance with Section 1028.2.

Section 708 contains fire-resistance rating requirements, continuity requirements, opening requirements, penetration requirements, joint requirements and duct and air transfer opening requirements for fire partitions. Section 708.1 lists the assemblies that must comply with the minimum requirements of Section 708. "Fire partitions," as defined in Section 202, are wall assemblies that enclose an exit access corridor, separate dwelling units, separate sleeping units, separate tenants in covered and open mall buildings and separate elevator lobbies. There are some exceptions to the requirement that corridor walls and elevator lobby walls be fire partitions. Those exceptions are found in Sections 3006.2 and 1020.2.

Corridor walls not required to be fire-resistance rated by Table 1020.2 are not required to meet this section. Elevator lobby walls not required to be fire-resistance rated by the exceptions to Section 3006.2 are not required to meet this section.

For horizontal assemblies separating dwelling and sleeping units, see Section 711.

708.2 Materials. The walls shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

The types of materials used in fire partitions are to be consistent with Sections 602.2 through 602.5 for the type of construction classification of the building. Fire partitions are permitted to be of combustible construction in Type III, IV and V construction and are required to be of noncombustible materials in Type I and II.

===== Page 0567 =====
construction, except as allowed by Exception 1 to Section 603.1.

708.3 Fire-resistance rating. Fire partitions shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour.

Exceptions:

1. Corridor walls permitted to have a  \( \frac{1}{2} \)  hour fire-resistance rating by Table 1020.2.

2. Dwelling unit and sleeping unit separations in buildings of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction shall have fire-resistance ratings of not less than  \( \frac{1}{2} \)  hour in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

This requirement is for fire partitions to be 1-hour fire-resistance rated. There are two exceptions.

Exception 1 states that corridor walls not required by Table 1020.2 to be fire-resistance rated need not comply with this section at all, since according to Section 1020.2 they are not fire partitions. Table 1020.2 also contains a reduction of the 1-hour fire-resistance rating down to 30 minutes for sprinkled Group R occupancies.

A reduction in the fire-resistance rating for dwelling and sleeping unit separation is allowed for Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction which is sprinkled with an NFPA 13 sprinkler system. This is not allowed with an NFPA 13R system according to Exception 2, which reduces the rating from 1 hour to only 30 minutes. There is a similar reduction for the horizontal assemblies separating dwelling and sleeping units in Section 711.2.4.3.

708.4 Continuity. Fire partitions shall extend from the top of the foundation or floor/ceiling assembly below and be securely attached to one of the following:

1 The underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above.

2 The underside of a floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly having a fire-resistance rating that is not less than the fire-resistance rating of the fire partition.

## Exceptions

1. Fire partitions shall not be required to extend into a crawl space below where the floor above the crawl space has a minimum 1-hour fire-resistance rating.

2. Fire partitions serving as a corridor wall shall not be required to extend above the lower membrane of a corridor ceiling provided that the corridor ceiling membrane is equivalent to corridor wall membrane, and either of the following conditions is met:
2.1. The room-side membrane of the corridor wall extends to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab of a fire-resistance-rated floor or roof above.

2.2. The building is equipped with an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, including automatic sprinklers installed in the space between the top of the fire partition and underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above.

3. Fire partitions serving as a corridor wall shall be permitted to terminate at the upper membrane of the corridor ceiling assembly where the corridor ceiling is constructed as required for the corridor wall.

4. Fire partitions separating tenant spaces in a covered or open mall building complying with Section 402.4.2.1 shall not be required to extend above the underside of a ceiling. Such ceiling shall not be required to be part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly, and the attic or space above the ceiling at tenant separation walls shall not be required to be subdivided by fire partitions.

To minimize the potential for fire spread from the exposed side of the fire partition to the unexposed side, such partitions must be continuous from the floor assembly to the underside of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly. In the absence of a rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly, the fire partition is to be continuous to the floor slab or roof deck above [see Commentary Figure 708.4(1) and Figure 708.4(2)(A)]. Fire partitions are not always required to be continuous through concealed spaces, whereas fire barriers are to be continuous (see Section 707.5). This is the primary difference between fire barriers and fire partitions.

Exception 1 modifies the continuity requirement for the various tenant, dwelling unit or sleeping unit separations where a crawl space is found below. As previously discussed, because corridors and elevator lobby separations are intended for protection from hazards on that floor level, they would not require a fire partition within the crawl space.

Although this exception provides a blanket exclusion for extending the partition into the crawl space, it may be prudent to consider each building on an individual basis. If the crawl space is arranged or provided so that each dwelling unit has access to it or it may be intended for storage or equipment, then it may

===== Page 0568 =====
be wise to consider the crawl space as a part of the dwelling unit; therefore, it may be reasonable to apply the exception to circumstances where the crawl space is not

considered to be a part of the dwelling unit. Although the exception requires that the floor above the crawl space have a 1-hour fire-resistance rating, it would still be permissible to use the provisions of Section 711.2.6 and eliminate the ceiling membrane if the crawl

space is considered an unusable space. Exception 2 (2.1) allows for only one side (the room side) of a fire-resistance-rated wall assembly to be continuous to the rated assembly above. The membrane on the corridor side of the wall is carried up to the underside of the corridor ceilings, provided the corridor ceiling is constructed of materials that have been tested as part of a 1-hour assembly [see Commentary Figure 708.4(2)(B)].

Exception 2 (2.2) recognizes the added protection afforded a building that is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and NFPA 13 and 13R, respectively, and permits those fire partitions used for dwelling unit and guestroom separations to terminate at the underside of the ceiling membrane without the need for fire blocking or draft stopping above the partition. For buildings equipped with a sprinkler system that conforms to the NFPA 13 standard, the attic and other concealed areas are required to be sprinkled, thus providing protection that offsets the fact that the dwelling unit separations, fire blocking or draft stopping do not extend to the deck above. In buildings equipped throughout with an NFPA 13R system, the attic and other concealed areas may not be sprinkled. NFPA 13R allows the omission of sprinkler protection in combustible attics and concealed spaces, provided the space is not used for living purposes or storage. When using this exception, however, sprinkler protection is necessary and required since the protection is considered available to control fires in the incipient stage and keep unoccupied concealed spaces and attic areas from becoming involved. For these buildings, the exception requires sprinkler protection and the fire partitions do not need to extend to the deck above.

Although this exception provides a blanket exclusion for fire blocking or draft stopping within floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling spaces, this may need to be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. The intent of this section is to address concealed spaces that are not used for any purpose. When an attic space is provided, it would be necessary to decide if the attic is simply a concealed space or if it is an occupied portion of the dwelling unit. For example, if each dwelling unit had access to the attic above its unit by means of a pull-down ladder and an area of the attic was provided with flooring so that storage could be placed there, it would be prudent to consider that attic as being a part of the dwelling unit and, therefore, requiring a fire partition, instead of draft stopping, to be provided between the adjacent attics.

Exception 3 allows for a corridor to be constructed in a "tunnel" fashion with rated walls and a rated top. In these cases, the walls are not required to extend to the underside of a rated assembly. This is a unique provision in the code and the fact that it permits a wall assembly to be turned into a horizontal position should not be applied to other sections of the code or other rated assemblies. In this one situation, the code will permit an assembly that has been tested as a wall to be turned and used horizontally. Because of the differences in the fire test and the fact that a horizontal test is generally a more severe condition, most assemblies will not obtain the same fire-resistance rating when installed in a horizontal position. In this case, because one of the primary purposes of a corridor is to stop the spread of smoke versus necessarily stopping a fire, this level of protection and construction has been accepted [see Commentary Figure 708.4(2)(C)].

In order to limit the spread of smoke, tenant separation walls in a mall are required to be fire partitions (see Sections 402.4.2.1 and 708.1) having a fire resistance rating of a least 1 hour and extending from the floor to the underside of the ceiling. Exception 4 acknowledges that extending tenant separations to the floor slab or roof deck above is not always practical for mall buildings because of the design and operation of the heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) system. The effectiveness of the automatic sprinkler system as well as the location of the fuel loading are also reasons for not requiring tenant separations to extend above the ceiling, including attic spaces.

708.4.1 Supporting construction. The supporting construction for a fire partition shall have a fire-resistance rating that is equal to or greater than the required fire resistance rating of the supported fire partition.

Exception: In buildings of Types IIB, IIIB and VB construction, the supporting construction requirement shall not apply to fire partitions separating tenant spaces in covered and open mall buildings, fire partitions separating dwelling units, fire partitions separating sleeping units, fire partitions serving as corridor walls, fire

===== Page 0569 =====
partitions separating ambulatory care facilities from adjacent spaces or corridors, fire partitions separating dwelling and sleeping units from Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies and fire partitions separating vestibules from the level of exit discharge.

The base requirement is for these rated partitions to be supported by construction that is at least equal to the fire-resistance-rating of the partition. The exception stipulates that fire partitions serving as exit access corridor walls and tenant and guestroom separation walls in buildings of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction are not required to be supported by structural elements having the same fire-resistance rating. The primary purpose of rated corridor walls is to prevent fire or smoke spread from a room to the corridor in order to maintain the protection of the means of egress. Secondly, the rated corridor wall also prevents fire or smoke spread from a corridor to adjacent rooms should the fire involve the corridor. The fire-resistance rating of the floor construction supporting the wall is not critical to the corridor wall performing those functions.

The construction supporting tenant and guestroom separation walls is exempted from the requirements for a fire-resistance rating since the compartmentalization provided by these walls is similar to that provided by corridor walls. Additionally, if the supporting construction were required to be fire-resistance rated, this section would effectively result in all buildings containing guestrooms being built of protected construction only. The remaining construction types are not included, since the supporting structural elements (floors and columns) are required to have at least a 1-hour rating (per Table 601), which is the maximum fire-resistance rating required for corridor walls. Similarly, tenant separations in covered mall buildings of Type IIB construction are not required to be supported by construction having an equivalent fire-resistance rating.

While supporting members in Types IIB, IIIB and VB construction are not required to be protected by the same fire resistance as the separation walls between a dwelling and sleeping unit, the horizontal floor assembly between dwelling and sleeping units is required to be fire-resistance-rated construction by Section 711.2.4.3.

The supporting construction for fire partitions separating ambulatory care facilities from adjacent spaces or corridors, separating dwelling and sleeping units from Groups R-1 and R-2 and separating vestibules from the level of exit discharge are also exempted from the requirements for a fire-resistance rating.
708.4.2 Fireblocks and draftstops in combustible construction. In combustible construction where fire partitions do not extend to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above, the space above and along the line of the fire partition shall be provided with one of the following:

1 Fire blocking up to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above using materials complying with Section 718.2.1.

2 Draft stopping up to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above using materials complying with Section 718.3.1 for floors or Section 718.4.1 for attics.

Exceptions:

1. Buildings equipped with an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, or in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 provided that protection is provided in the space between the top of the fire partition and underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above as required for systems complying with Section 903.3.1.1.

2. Where corridor walls provide a sleeping unit or dwelling unit separation, draftstopping shall only be required above one of the corridor walls.

3. In Group R-2 occupancies with fewer than four dwelling units, fireblocking and draftstopping shall not be required.

4. In Group R-2 occupancies up to and including four stories in height in buildings not exceeding 18 m in height above grade plane, the attic space shall be subdivided by draftstops into areas not exceeding 280 m² or above every two dwelling units, whichever is smaller.

5. In Group R-3 occupancies with fewer than three dwelling units, fire-blocking and draftstopping shall not be required in floor assemblies.

All hollow vertical spaces in a combustible fire partition must be fireblocked at the ceiling and floor or roof levels in accordance with Section 718.2.1. If the fire resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly is of combustible construction, then draftstopping is required in the space above and in line with the partition. The draftstopping must meet the requirements of Section 718.3.1 or 718.4.1.

Exception 1 omits the requirement for draftstopping attics that are sprinkled in

===== Page 0570 =====
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, or 903.3.1.2 if additional sprinkler protection is provided in the interstitial space between the top of the fire partition to the floor or roof sheathing above. This exception would require the act to be sprinkled even though it may not be required by the standard. NFPA 13R typically would not require an act to be sprinkled.

Exception 2 clarifies that for corridor walls that serve as dwelling- or sleeping-unit separations, draftstopping is only required above one of the two corridor walls. It should be noted that this option only applies to roof/acti spaces and not to floors [(see Commentary Figure 708.4.2(1)]. Exceptions 3 and 5 recognize the reduction in hazard relating to the buildings with small numbers of dwelling units and omits the requirements for fireblocking and draftstopping. The draftstopping requirements can be reduced in Group R-2 occupancies of four stories or less by Exception 4. This exception allows the area between draftstopping to be increased to 280 m² or above every two dwelling units, whichever is smaller [see Commentary Figure 708.4.2(2)]. This provides the opportunity for a simpler draftstopping installation where the draftstops are not required to be in line with the dwelling or sleeping unit separation walls. Group R-2 buildings are required by Section 903.2.8 to be sprinklered; sprinklers reduce the need for acti draftstopping. The four-story restriction will match with the limitations of Section 903.3.1.2 for NFPA 13R sprinkler systems. Therefore, by providing this level of draftstopping, buildings that use the NFPA 13R systems will not need to comply with Exception 1, which is discussed previously. If Section 903.3.1.1 (an NFPA 13 sprinkler system) is used, then sprinklers will generally be required within the acti space.

708.5 Exterior walls. Where exterior walls serve as a part of a required fire-resistance-rated separation, such walls shall comply with the requirements of Section 705 for exterior walls, and the fire-resistance-rated separation requirements shall not apply.

Exception: Exterior walls required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Section 1021.2 for exterior egress balconies, Section 1023.7 for interior exit stairways and ramps and Section 1027.6 for exterior exit stairways and ramps.

This section pertains to exterior walls that are a part of an enclosure, such as corridors on the exterior face of a building or elevator lobbies that have exterior walls. Such exterior walls do not need to be fire-resistance-rated construction unless required by Table 601 or Table 705.5. The exception noted in this section is identical to the exceptions for Sections 707.4 and 713.6 for fire barriers and shaft enclosures. See the commentary for both of those sections.

708.6 Openings. Openings in a fire partition shall be protected in accordance with Section 716.

Section 716.2 includes the requirements for fire doors in fire partitions. Generally, 1/3-hour doors are required for corridors and 3/4-hour doors for tenant dwelling and sleeping unit separations in accordance with Table 716.1(2). Where 1/2-hour fire-resistance-rated assemblies are permitted for partitions, the doors are required to be 1/3-hour doors. It is important to note that Section 716.2.2.1 requires smoke and draft control doors for corridors. Section 716.3 includes the requirements for windows located in a corridor.

708.7 Penetrations. Penetrations of fire partitions shall comply with Section 714.

This section simply states that penetrations through fire partitions must conform to the requirements of Sections 714.3 and 714.4. This is the same as the penetration requirements for fire barriers.

708.8 Joints. Joints made in or between fire partitions shall comply with Section 715.

* Joints, such as expansion or seismic, are another form of openings in fire partitions and, therefore, must be considered with regard to maintaining the fire-resistance ratings of these walls. This section requires all joints that are located in fire partitions to be protected by a joint system that has a fire-resistance rating and complies with the requirements of Section 715 (see commentary, Section 715).

708.9 Ducts and air transfer openings. Penetrations in a fire partition by ducts and air transfer openings shall comply with Section 717.

Section 717 details the protection of ducts and

air transfer openings at the point where they penetrate a fire-resistance-rated assembly. Sections 717.5 and 717.5.4 indicate which situations will require the installation of a damper. As stated in Section 717.1.2, if a duct does not require a damper, the penetration of that duct through a fire-resistance-rated assembly must be protected as a through penetration in accordance with Section 714.

## SECTION 709 SMOKE BARRIERS

709.1 General. Vertical and horizontal smoke barriers shall comply with this section.

Smoke barriers divide areas of a building into separate smoke compartments both vertically and horizontally. A smoke barrier is designed to resist fire and smoke spread so that occupants can be evacuated or relocated to adjacent smoke compartments. This concept has proven effective in Group I-2 and I-3.

===== Page 0571 =====
occupancies. Sections 407.5 and 408.6 identify where smoke barriers are required. Also, while not cross-referenced in this section, smoke barriers may be utilized in other applications, including as part of smoke control systems (see Section 909.5), accessible means of egress (see Section 1009.6.4), compartmentation of underground buildings (see Section 405.4.2) and elevator lobbies in underground buildings (see Section 405.4.3).

All of the elements in the smoke barrier that can potentially allow smoke travel through the smoke barrier are required to have a quantified resistance to leakage. This includes doors, joints, through penetrations and dampers. The maximum leakage limits are as established in the individual code Sections referenced for each element.

709.2 Materials. Smoke barriers shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

The types of materials used in smoke barriers are to be consistent with Sections 602.2 through 602.5 for the type of construction of the building. Smoke barriers are permitted to be of combustible construction in Types III, IV and V construction and are required to be of noncombustible materials in Types I and II construction, except as permitted in the exceptions to Section 603.1.

709.3 Fire-resistance rating. A 1-hour fire-resistance rating is required for smoke barriers.

Exception: Smoke barriers constructed of minimum 2.5 mm steel in Group I-3 buildings.

Smoke barriers are intended to create an area of refuge; therefore, they are to be capable of resisting the passage of smoke (see Section 709.4). Smoke barriers are also required to have a fire-resistance rating of at least 1 hour. The smoke barrier is not intended or expected to be exposed to fire for extended periods and is, therefore, not required to have a fire-resistance rating exceeding 1 hour. The occupancies in which smoke barriers are required are also generally required to be sprinkled (see Section 903.2). The exception of this Section allows smoke barriers in Group I-3 occupancies to be constructed of nominal 2.5 mm steel plate. This exception to the 1-hour fire-resistance-rated assembly recognizes the security needs of such facilities and at the same time provides the requisite smoke barrier performance.

709.4 Continuity. Smoke barriers shall form an effective membrane continuous from the top of the foundation or floor/ceiling assembly below to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above, including continuity through concealed spaces, such as those found above suspended ceilings, and interstitial structural and mechanical spaces. The supporting construction shall be protected to afford the required fire-resistance rating of the wall or floor supported in buildings of other than Type IIB, IIIB or VB construction. Smoke barrier walls used to separate smoke compartments shall comply with Section 709.4.1. Smoke-barrier walls used to enclose areas of refuge in accordance with Section 1009.6.4 or to enclose elevator lobbies in accordance with Section 405.4.3, 3007.6.2, or 3008.6.2 shall comply with Section 709.4.2.

Exception: Smoke-barrier walls are not required in interstitial spaces where such spaces are designed and constructed with ceilings or exterior walls that provide resistance to the passage of fire and smoke equivalent to that provided by the smoke-barrier walls.

Smoke barriers are to be continuous from the top of the foundation or floor/ceiling assembly below to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab. Horizontal continuity requirements vary depending on what the smoke barrier is separating or enclosing (see sections 709.4.1 and 709.4.2). The provisions require the barrier to be continuous through all concealed and interstitial spaces, including suspended ceilings and the space between the ceiling and the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above; and the space between an interior wall finish and the exterior wall sheathing, such as in a wood or metal frame wall. Smoke barriers are not required to extend through interstitial spaces if the space is designed and constructed such that fire and smoke will not spread from one smoke compartment to another. Therefore, the construction assembly forming the bottom of the interstitial space must provide the required fire-resistance rating and be capable of resisting the passage of smoke from the spaces below.

As mentioned in the commentary for the general provisions of Section 709.1, the air-leakage performance of the smoke barrier itself is not typically regulated. This is because of the general assumption that a barrier which provides a fire-resistance rating will be capable of limiting the spread of smoke through it. Where a smoke barrier is being used with a smoke control system, the barrier must meet maximum air leakage requirements (see Section 909.5). Therefore, under those circumstances and when using the exception in Section 709.4, it may be necessary to provide a "hard ceiling" instead of a lay-in suspended ceiling in order to prevent the spread of smoke.

===== Page 0572 =====
Since the primary performance of smoke barriers is to achieve protection on the fire floor, the supporting construction is not required to provide the same degree of fire resistance for buildings of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction. As with fire partitions serving as exit access corridor walls (see Section 709.4), these three construction types are identified because the floor construction is not otherwise required to have a fire-resistance rating, and it is not considered essential to require fire-resistance-rated floor construction because the floor is supporting a smoke barrier.

When designing for occupancies in Groups I-2 and I-3, it is often desirable to incorporate a horizontal exit and a smoke barrier. The code does not prevent such a combination, but in such cases, the wall construction must meet the provisions of this section as well as Section 707 for fire barrier assemblies and Section 1026, for horizontal exits.

The most restrictive provisions of each section would apply. For example, the building would be required to have a fire barrier with a fire-resistance rating of at least 2 hours (see Section 1026.2) and duct penetrations would need to be protected with a combination fire and smoke damper (see Sections 717.5.2 and 717.5.2.1) or with separate fire and smoke dampers. For requirements specific to smoke barriers used to separate smoke compartments and to enclose areas of refuge and elevator lobbies, see Sections 709.4.1 and 709.4.2, respectively.

Furthermore, the supporting construction would then be required to provide at least the same fire-resistance rating as the wall in all types of construction (see Section 707.5.1).

The exception recognizes that a ceiling membrane or exterior wall membrane may afford the same or greater resistance to the passage of fire and smoke that is provided by the smoke barrier. In these cases, continuity through the interstitial space is not required.

709.4.1 Smoke-barrier walls separating smoke compartments. Smoke-barrier assemblies used to separate smoke compartments shall form an effective membrane enclosure that is continuous from an outside wall or smoke barrier wall to an outside wall or another smoke barrier wall and to the horizontal assemblies.

To completely separate smoke compartments within a building, the horizontal continuity of the smoke barrier walls must extend from exterior wall to exterior wall.

709.4.2 Smoke-barrier walls enclosing areas of refuge or elevator lobbies. Smoke-barrier walls used to enclose areas of refuge in accordance with Section 1009.6.4, or to enclose elevator lobbies in accordance with Section 405.4.3 or 3007.6.2, or 3008.6.2, shall form an effective membrane enclosure that terminates at a fire barrier wall having a level of fire protection rating not less than 1 hour, another smoke barrier wall or an outside wall. A smoke and draft control door assembly as specified in Section 716.2.2.1.1 shall not be required at each elevator hoistway door opening or at each exit doorway between an area of refuge and the exit enclosure.

Recognizing the differences between smoke compartments, areas of refuge and elevator lobby enclosures, this section provides alternative horizontal continuity compliance options. Since these areas can be located anywhere in a building, the enclosure can terminate at assemblies other than the exterior wall, such as a fire barrier or another smoke barrier.

709.5 Openings. Openings in a smoke barrier shall be protected in accordance with Section 716.

Exceptions:

1. In Group I-1 Condition 2, Group I-2 and ambulatory care facilities, where a pair of opposite-swinging doors are installed across a corridor in accordance with Section 709.5.1, the doors shall not be required to be protected in accordance with Section 716. The doors shall be close fitting within operational tolerances and shall not have a center mullion or undercuts in excess of 20 mm, louvers or grilles. The doors shall have head and jamb stops, and astragals or rabbets at meeting edges. Where permitted by the door manufacturer's listing, positive-latching devices are not required. Factory applied or field applied protective plates are not required to be labeled.

2. In Group I-1 Condition 2, Group I-2 and ambulatory care facilities, special purpose horizontal sliding, accordion or folding doors installed in accordance with Section 1010.3.3 and protected in accordance with Section 716.

Section 709.5 requires openings in a smoke barrier to be protected in accordance with Section 716. Opening protectives include doors/door assemblies, glazed assemblies, fire shutters, chute intake and discharge doors, and other devices or assemblies. Section 716.2.2.1 requires doors in corridors and smoke barriers to have a fire protection rating of 20 minutes. Those requirements should be considered along with others in Section 716 for doors required to have a fire protection rating. Such doors must also comply with UL 1784 in

===== Page 0573 =====
accordance with Section 716.2.2.1.1, which requires these doors to have a maximum leakage rating of 0.015 m \( ^{3} \) /s per square meter or less as tested at a pressure of 0.02 kPa.

Exception 1, along with the requirements of Section 709.5.1, specifically apply to Group I-1, Condition 2; Group I-2; and ambulatory care facilities. In order to maintain the integrity of the smoke barrier, opposite-swinging doors such as double-express cross-corridor doors are required to be constructed and installed with some of the attributes of opening protectives but are not required to be listed. Since the primary purpose of a smoke barrier is to resist smoke spread, the doors are to be close fitting within operational tolerances, are not to have undercuts, louvers or grilles, and are to have stops at the head and jamb. Smoke barrier doors are typically installed across corridors and patient treatment areas. These doors see a very high volume of gurney and bed traffic, as well as carts, wheeled equipment and transport devices. As a result, they are often damaged. This exception allows for the installation of a non-labeled protective plate, usually made of steel or other resilient material, to be installed on these doors to protect them from excessive wear and damage. The doors in smoke barriers do not function as true fire doors. Smoke barriers are intended to be substantial construction. Providing protective plates keeps the doors free from damage and preserves their substantial nature. Protective plates do not provide the same fire-resistance rating as a true 1-hour fire barrier. The only openings permitted in the door assembly are those clearances that are necessary for the proper operation of the door. The clearance that occurs at the meeting edges of the door is to be protected with rabbets or astragals (see Commentary Figure 709.5).

Exception 2 applies in Group I-1, Condition 2; Group I-2; and ambulatory care facilities where special-purpose horizontal sliding, accordion or folding doors are installed in accordance with Section 1010.3.3 and protected in accordance with Section 716. Section 1010.3.3 includes specific requirements for these special-purpose doors.

709.5.1 Group I-2 and ambulatory care facilities. In Group I-2 and ambulatory care facilities, where doors protecting openings in smoke barriers are installed across a corridor and have hold-open devices, the doors shall be automatic-closing in accordance with Section 716.2.6.6. Such doors shall have a vision panel with fire-protection-rated glazing materials in fire-protection-rated frames, the area of which shall not exceed that tested.
Section 709.5.1 requires doors protecting openings in smoke barriers that are installed across a corridor in Group I-2 and ambulatory care facilities to be automatic closing on smoke detection per the requirements in Section 716.2.6.6. When closed completely, the doors will prevent the spread of smoke. Cross-corridor doors in Group I-2 and ambulatory care facilities are also required to have a vision panel consisting of fire-protection-rated glazing in a fire-protection-rated frame. The requirements including size, for a vision panel of fire-protection-rated glazing are in Section 716.6. Note: vision panels in doors (i.e., glazing in doors) also are required to meet the safety requirements for glazing in hazardous locations, per the requirements of Section 2406. The intent of requiring vision panels is to reduce the likelihood of an injury caused by opening the door into a person standing at or approaching the door from the opposite side. Vision panels also enable an individual to be alerted to a fire or smoke condition on the other side before opening the door. Cross-corridor doors not protecting openings in smoke barriers are not subject to these requirements.

709.6 Penetrations. Penetrations of smoke barriers shall comply with Section 714.

The provisions for penetrations of smoke barriers are found in Sections 714.3, 714.4 and 714.6. To prevent through penetrations from becoming a source of significant smoke spread across the smoke barrier, the firestop system provided for each through penetration must have not only the appropriate F rating, but must also have a leakage rating (L rating) of 0.025  \( m^{3}/s \)  per square meter or less as tested at a pressure of 0.07 kPa (see commentary, Section 713.5).

709.7 Joints. Joints made in or between smoke barriers shall comply with Section 715.

☑ Joints, such as expansion or seismic, are additional forms of openings in smoke barriers and, therefore, must be considered with regard to maintaining the fire-resistance ratings of these walls. This section requires all joints that are located in smoke barriers to be protected by a joint system that has a fire-resistance rating and complies with the requirements of made in or between smoke barriers shall comply with Section 715 (see commentary, Section 715). To prevent joints from becoming a source of significant smoke spread across the smoke barrier, fire-resistant joint systems used in a smoke barrier must have a leakage rating (L rating) of 7.75 liters per second per linear meter or less (see commentary, Section 715.6).

===== Page 0574 =====
709.8 Ducts and air transfer openings. Penetrations in a smoke barrier by ducts and air transfer openings shall comply with Section 717.

To prevent ducts and air transfer openings from becoming a source of significant smoke spread across the smoke barrier, a listed smoke damper must be provided for duct or air transfer openings penetrating the smoke barrier (see Section 717.5.5). The smoke damper leakage rating, as tested per UL 555S; shall not be less than Class II (see Section 717.3.2.1).

Section 717.5.5 indicates which situations will require the installation of a damper. For smoke barriers, there is one exception to that requirement. If all the duct outlets are limited to one of the smoke compartments and the ducts are constructed of steel, then no smoke damper is required. As stated in Section 717.1.2, if a duct does not require a damper, the penetration of that duct through a fire-resistance-rated assembly must be protected as a through penetration in accordance with Section 714.

## SECTION 710 SMOKE PARTITIONS

710.1 General. Smoke partitions installed as required elsewhere in the code shall comply with this section.

Unlike a 1-hour fire-resistance rated smoke barrier, smoke partitions are nonrated walls that serve to resist the spread of fire and the unmitigated movement of smoke for an unspecified period of time. A smoke partition is intended to provide less protection than a smoke barrier and is not required to be continuous through the concealed spaces and through the ceiling. The construction of a smoke partition is described in this section; however, the level of performance or a method of testing them is not provided. Some elements of this section (see Sections 710.5 and 710.8) will provide a performance level and test method to verify the protection provided by doors or dampers. In addition, some specific features of a smoke partition may be triggered by other sections of the code.

At this point, the application of smoke partitions is still fairly limited. The smoke partition requirements apply to Section 407.3, which permits corridor walls in Group I-2 to have no fire-resistance rating, but it does require that they be constructed as smoke partitions. A smoke partition can also be used under the provisions of Section 3006.2 to form the elevator lobby in a sprinkled building.

It is important to realize that, like all other elements found in Chapter 7, a smoke partition is not required unless the specific text of the code states that it is required. For example, the two sections listed in the previous paragraph do require the use of a smoke partition. On the other hand, Section 509.4.2, when dealing with incidental uses, will permit the elimination of a fire barrier and only require the wall constructed around the incidental use area to be "capable of resisting the passage of smoke." In this circumstance, the wall is not required to comply with the smoke partition requirements of Section 710 and is only required to comply with the details listed in Section 509.4.2.

710.2 Materials. The walls shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

As with most wall or partition assemblies, except for fire walls, there are no additional requirements or restrictions on the materials used, except that they meet the requirements for the type of construction.

710.3 Fire-resistance rating. Unless required elsewhere in the code, smoke partitions are not required to have a fire-resistance rating.

The primary purpose of smoke partitions is to prevent the ready and quick passage of smoke into corridors in Group I-2 or for elevator lobby protection in a sprinkled building. The automatic sprinkler system installed in these instances eliminates the need for a fire-resistance-rated assembly; however, the issue of smoke propagation must be addressed with the use of a smoke partition. Because a performance level or a method of testing the partition is not established, any rated or nonrated assembly would be permitted, provided it is approved by the building official.

710.4 Continuity. Smoke partitions shall extend from the top of the foundation or floor below to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above or to the underside of the ceiling above where the ceiling membrane is constructed to limit the transfer of smoke.

The continuity provisions for smoke partitions are similar to those for fire partitions (see Section 708.4), except that the issue is the spread of smoke, not fire. Therefore, the allowance for termination at the under-side of the ceiling membrane (as opposed to the underside of the floor or roof deck above) relates to the ability of the ceiling membrane to limit the spread of smoke. Typical "lay in" ceiling tiles, for instance, would probably not serve this function; however, a drywall ceiling that is taped and finished would be an example of construction that could resist the passage of smoke.

710.5 Openings. Openings in smoke partitions shall comply with Sections 710.5.1 and 710.5.3.

This Section recognizes the need to limit smoke movement in buildings by requiring opening protectives that resist the passage of

===== Page 0575 =====
smoke for the openings described in Sections 710.5.1 through 710.5.3.

710.5.1 Windows. Windows in smoke partitions shall be sealed to resist the free passage of smoke or be automatic closing upon detection of smoke.

Windows in smoke partitions do not require a fire-resistance rating. There are no limits on the amount of glazing. They must be fixed glazing or automatic closing upon the activation of smoke detectors.

710.5.2 Doors. Doors in smoke partitions shall comply with Sections 710.5.2.1 through 710.5.2.3.

Doors in smoke partitions do not require a fire-resistance rating and may not need self-closing devices.

710.5.2.1 Louvers. Doors in smoke partitions shall not include louvers.

Exception: Where permitted in accordance with Section 407.3.1.1.

Louvers in doors allow smoke to move from one area to the remainder of the building. This would defeat the sole purpose of a smoke partition. Louvers can be included in doors in smoke partitions meeting the requirements stated in Section 407.3.1.1.

710.5.2.2 Smoke and draft control doors. Where required elsewhere in the code, doors in smoke partitions shall meet the requirements for a smoke and draft control door assembly tested in accordance with UL 1784. The air leakage rate of the door assembly shall not exceed  \( 0.015 \, m^{3}/s \)  per square meter of door opening at 25 Pa for both the ambient temperature test and the elevated temperature exposure test. Installation of smoke doors shall be in accordance with NFPA 105.

Only doors in smoke partitions that are required else—where in the code to be smoke and draft control doors must meet this section.

710.5.2.2.1 Smoke and draft control door labeling. Smoke and draft control doors complying only with UL 1784 shall be permitted to show the letter “S” on the manufacturer’s labeling.

This section clarifies that the use of the “S” letter mark is intended only to indicate compliance with UL 1784 and allows use of the marking on smoke partition doors that comply with that test standard.

710.5.2.3 Self- or automatic-closing doors. Where required elsewhere in the code, doors in smoke partitions shall be self- or automatic closing by smoke detection in accordance with Section 716.2.6.6.

The requirement for doors to be self-closing or automatic closing does not automatically apply to all walls that must be built as smoke partitions. That requirement must be mandated elsewhere in the code for this provision to apply. In the case of corridor walls for Group I-2 occupancies, there is no requirement for self-closing or automatic-closing doors so as to accommodate the normal operational requirements of that occupancy. In that situation, it is anticipated that doors would be manually closed by personnel in the event of a fire emergency based upon a defend-in-place strategy. Having doors arranged for automatic closing or self-closing, however, is not prohibited as it would potentially increase the reliability of smoke partitions. There are exceptions to Section 3006.3 that allow elevator lobby smoke partition enclosures in lieu of fire partitions. In this case, closers on the doors to the lobby would be required as a part of the conditions for the exception.

710.5.3 Pass-through openings in Group I-2, Condition 2. Where pass-through openings are provided in smoke partitions in Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancies, such openings shall comply with the following:

1 The smoke compartment in which the pass-through openings occur does not contain a patient care suite or sleeping room.

2 Pass-through openings are installed in a wall, door or vision panel that is not required to have a fire-resistance rating.

3 The top of the pass-through opening is located a maximum of 1200 mm above the floor.

4 The aggregate area of all such pass-through openings within a single room shall not exceed  \( 0.05 \, m^{2} \) .

This Section responds to the need for pass-through openings as being important to the operational functions of corridor walls while maintaining structural integrity, in keeping with CMS K364. For example:

Hospital pneumatic tube delivery systems cannot be used for items such as chemotherapy drugs, gross lab materials (tissue biopsies, small organs, etc.) and cash or checks; therefore, walk-up pickup and delivery via pass-throughs are a necessary operational feature.

In hospital pharmacies, air pressure relationships are established to maintain a safe environment. From an operational standpoint, there are frequent pickups by patient care staff requiring direct hand-off and signing of forms. In addition, there are basic security requirements from DEA and state pharmacy boards that require pharmacy materials (opioids, etc.) to be secured. Opening and closing the door compromises the air relationships prescribed by SBC 501 Section 407.1, as well as security.

===== Page 0576 =====
In a laboratory setting, air pressure relationships are critical, and many samples get delivered by hand through a pass-through. Cashier areas, where financial transactions are conducted with patients and staff, are configured like secured bank windows.

710.6 Penetrations. The space around penetrating items shall be filled with an approved material to limit the free passage of smoke.

There is no prescriptive requirement for a material used to seal penetrations in smoke partitions. The intent is to limit the transfer of smoke through the partition. See the commentary to Section 710.7 for more information.

710.7 Joints. Joints shall be filled with an approved material to limit the free passage of smoke.

There is no requirement for a material used to seal penetrations or joints to be applied to both sides of the wall, as would usually be the case when the penetrations and joints are in a fire-resistance-rated wall. The intent of this section will have been met as long as the space around penetrating items and in joints is filled in a way that would prevent a continuous channel from one side of the wall to the other. In selecting a material to seal these gaps, consideration should be given to the fact that smoke may have a temperature that is above the normal ambient temperature. The code does not mandate any specific temperature resistance. However, as one possible reference point, UL uses a gas temperature of  \( 163^{\circ} \) C above ambient to represent "warm smoke." With a common ambient temperature of  \( 24^{\circ} \) C, the "warm smoke" temperature would therefore be  \( 204^{\circ} \) C. Sealing materials that would not maintain their integrity to at least this temperature would be inferior choices for the purpose of limiting the free passage of smoke. Porous materials (e.g., fibrous insulation) that would not provide any significant resistance to the passage of smoke through them would also be inferior choices for sealing of joints and through penetrations for this purpose. Again, because the level of performance is not clearly established, the word "approved" and the building official's decision will determine what materials are required or accepted.

710.8 Ducts and air transfer openings. The space around a duct penetrating a smoke partition shall be filled with an approved material to limit the free passage of smoke. Air transfer openings in smoke partitions shall be provided with a smoke damper complying with Section 717.3.2.2.

Exception: Where the installation of a smoke damper will interfere with the operation of a required smoke control system in accordance with Section 909, approved alternative protection shall be utilized.

Smoke dampers maintain the integrity of the smoke partition by preventing the spread of smoke where an "air transfer opening" exists. If a ducted system is used, then the code specifies that the annular space around the duct must be protected. Because the code does not define what an "air transfer opening" is, the provision may not be consistently enforced. The general intent is that a ducted system does not require a damper, but an opening such as an air transfer grille or louvered opening would be dampened. A ducted system must be protected in accordance with Section 710.6. The exception relating to the required operation of a smoke control system is consistent with the exceptions given elsewhere regarding air transfer openings and ducts with fire dampers or smoke dampers (see Section 717). An effective smoke control system will protect the building against the spread of smoke. It is important to ensure that installation of a smoke damper will not lessen the effectiveness of a smoke control system.

## SECTION 711 HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLIES

711.1 General. Horizontal assemblies shall comply with Section 711.2. Nonfire-resistance-rated floor and roof assemblies shall comply with Section 711.3.

Horizontal assemblies by definition are fire-resistance rated assemblies. A horizontal assembly may be either a floor or roof assembly and may rely on the ceiling membrane to achieve its fire-resistance-rating. The ceiling assembly is often an integral part of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly; therefore, the integrity of the ceiling assembly must be maintained in order to reduce the potential for pre-mature failure of the floor or roof of a building. Section 711.2 contains requirements for horizontal assemblies.

Non-fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling assemblies are not considered horizontal assemblies. These assemblies have requirements less stringent than horizontal assemblies. Section 711.3 contains requirements for non-fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling assemblies.

711.2 Horizontal assemblies. Horizontal assemblies shall comply with Sections 711.2.1 through 711.2.6.

This section is simply charging language for the sub-sections. See the commentary to Sections 711.2.1 through 711.2.6.

===== Page 0577 =====
711.2.1 Materials. Assemblies shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

The types of materials used in the construction of horizontal assemblies are to be consistent with Sections 602.2 through 602.5 for the type of construction of the building. Horizontal assemblies are permitted to be of combustible construction in Types III, IV and V construction and are required to be of noncombustible materials in Types I and II construction, except as permitted in the exceptions to Section 603.1 or in Notes c and d from Table 601.

711.2.2 Continuity. Assemblies shall be continuous without vertical openings, except as permitted by this section and Section 712.

All floors, roofs and ceilings of horizontal assemblies are to be continuous without openings or penetrations, except as permitted by this section. The continuity of the assembly is critical to its ability to limit fire and smoke spread. Penetrations or openings of the assembly are permitted in accordance with Section 712 provided that the fire-resistance rating, is maintained. The fire-resistance rating required by Table 601 for roof construction is intended to minimize the threat of premature structural failure of the roof construction under fire conditions. The provisions for rated roof construction in Table 601 do not apply to openings in the roof. Code users should also review the fireblocking and draftstopping requirements that are found in Section 718. Fireblocking and draftstopping requirements apply to combustible concealed locations, are separate issues from fire-resistance ratings, and may impose additional requirements for the assembly.

711.2.3 Supporting construction. The supporting construction shall be protected to afford the required fire-resistance rating of the horizontal assembly supported.

Exception: In buildings of Type IIB, IIIB or VB construction, the construction supporting the horizontal assembly is not required to be fire-resistance rated at the following:

1 Horizontal assemblies at the separations of incidental uses as specified by Table 509.1 provided the required fire-resistance rating does not exceed 1 hour.

2 Horizontal assemblies at the separations of dwelling units and sleeping units as required by Section 420.3.

3 Horizontal assemblies at smoke barriers constructed in accordance with Section 709.

The base requirement is that construction supporting horizontal assemblies be fire-resistance rated at least equal to the rating of the horizontal assembly. The exception deals with three specific applications where it is unnecessary to provide a fire-resistance rating for the supporting construction of horizontal assemblies in buildings of Type IIB, IIIB or VB construction, since Table 601 does not require the horizontal assembly or the supporting structural members to have a fire-resistance rating in these types of construction. This exception exempts the supporting construction of horizontal assemblies in the same manner that the code currently exempts the supporting construction of fire barriers, fire partitions and smoke barriers, but only in those circumstances where the horizontal assembly is a component of the same fire containment assembly as the fire barrier, fire partition or smoke barrier.

711.2.4 Fire-resistance rating. The fire-resistance rating of horizontal assemblies shall comply with Sections 711.2.4.1 through 711.2.4.6 but shall be not less than that required by the building type of construction.

Floor and roof assemblies could have a fire-resistance rating for several reasons:

Required for the type of construction in Table 601.

Required for separation of mixed uses in Section 508.4.

Separate fire areas of like or different occupancies in order to reduce the size of fire areas to below threshold values for sprinkler requirements in Section 903.

Separations of dwelling units in the same building.

Separation of sleeping units in Group R-1 hotels, Group R-2 and Group I-1.

711.2.4.1 Separating mixed occupancies. Where the horizontal assembly separates mixed occupancies, the assembly shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that required by Section 508.4 based on the occupancies being separated.

Horizontal assemblies may be required to separate mixed occupancies. As an example, consider a nonsprinklered two-story building of Type IIA construction and a Group B occupancy, with the basement having a storage occupancy in Group S-2. Assume the designer has chosen the separated occupancies option for compliance with the mixed occupancy condition. In this case, even though Table 601 requires a 1-hour fire-resistance-rated floor throughout the building, the assembly separating the basement from the first floor of the building is also regulated by Section 508.4 for mixed occupancies.

===== Page 0578 =====
Ultimately, Section 508.4.4 references Table 508.4, which requires that the floor/ceiling construction separating Group S-2 from Group B provides a 2-hour fire-resistance-rated separation.

711.2.4.2 Separating fire areas. Where the horizontal assembly separates a single occupancy into different fire areas, the assembly shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that required by Section 707.3.10.

A designer may choose to separate areas of the building into fire areas for reasons such as to incorporate horizontal exits or to create areas within the thresholds for non-sprinklered applications. Fire areas can separate the same or different groups. For these applications, the fire-resistance rating is required to comply with Section 707.3.10.

711.2.4.3 Dwelling units and sleeping units. Horizontal assemblies serving as dwelling or sleeping unit separations in accordance with Section 420.3, shall be not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

Exception: Horizontal assemblies separating dwelling units and sleeping units shall be not less than  \( \frac{1}{2} \)  hour fire-resistance-rated construction in a building of Types IIB, IIIB and VB construction, where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

The requirement for 1-hour floor assemblies separating dwelling and sleeping units mirrors that found in Section 708 for fire partitions. There are other sections of the code that require a fire-resistance rating for the floor or roof assembly, or where other provisions are dependent on the fire-resistance rating or construction of the assembly (examples of such sections include Sections 704.1, 705.6, 707.5.1, 708.4 and 709.4).

The exception for dwelling and sleeping unit separations in unprotected types of construction is based on the protection provided by a sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 (NFPA 13). This presumably will reduce the potential fire exposure of the unit separation to that which makes a minimum 1/2-hour fire-resistance rating adequate. The reason that only unprotected types of construction are permitted to take advantage of this trade-off is because Table 601 would not otherwise require the floor construction of such structures to be fire-resistance rated, whereas all other types of construction require the floor construction to provide at least a 1-hour fire-resistance rating.
711.2.4.4 Separating smoke compartments. Where the horizontal assembly is required to be a smoke barrier, the assembly shall comply with Section 709.

Smoke compartments are required in Group I-2 and I-3 to create areas where the occupants can be relocated during an emergency without leaving the building. Horizontal assemblies that separate smoke compartments are required to comply with Section 709.

711.2.4.5 Separating incidental uses. Where the horizontal assembly separates incidental uses from the remainder of the building, the assembly shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that required by Section 509.

Incidental uses are specific rooms or areas that require separation or separation and sprinkler fire protection. Horizontal assemblies that separate smoke compartments are required to comply with Section 509.

711.2.4.6 Other separations. Where a horizontal assembly is required by other sections of this code, the assembly shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than that required by that section.

Horizontal assemblies may be required elsewhere in the code, such as Chapter 6 as it relates to the building's type of construction. For these other separation requirements, the fire-resistance rating is as required by that section.

Chapter 6 also contains provisions governing materials that may be used in the construction of such assemblies based on the type of construction of the building and whether combustible or noncombustible materials are used.

711.2.5 Ceiling panels. Where the weight of lay-in ceiling panels, used as part of fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies, is not adequate to resist an upward force of 48 Pa, wire or other approved devices shall be installed above the panels to prevent vertical displacement under such upward force.

Where a ceiling membrane constitutes part of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly, the ability of the ceiling membrane to not be displaced by the upward pressure of a fire condition is necessary to maintain the viability of the fire-resistance rating. Commentary Figure 711.2.5 shows a floor/ceiling assembly that uses hold-down clips to keep the ceiling panels in place. When the weight of the ceiling panel is less than 48 Pa, wire or other approved means must be provided to prevent uplift of the ceiling panels. Manufacturers' literature can be used to determine the weight of the panel.

===== Page 0579 =====
711.2.6 Unusable space. In 1-hour fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling assemblies, the ceiling membrane is not required to be installed over unusable crawl spaces. In 1-hour fire-resistance-rated roof assemblies, the floor membrane is not required to be installed where unusable attic space occurs above.

The Section is a special exception for specific assemblies. It allows the deletion of floor or roof decking or the ceiling membrane from a required fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly in certain applications. In an attic application, the floor sheathing may be deleted from a fire-resistance-rated assembly as long as the joist and ceiling remain identical to the tested assembly and the attic space is not usable space where potential combustible materials or ignition sources may be located [see Commentary Figure 711.2.6(1)]. Over a crawl space, the ceiling membrane may be deleted subject to the same conditions [see Commentary Figure 711.2.6(2)]. In determining whether a space is “unusable,” the building official must verify that combustible materials other than construction elements will not be located therein and ignition sources will be minimal. As such, pipes, conduit and ducts may be permitted in an unusable space.

711.3 Nonfire-resistance-rated floor and roof assemblies. Nonfire-resistance-rated floor, ceiling, roof and roof/ceiling assemblies shall comply with Sections 711.3.1 and 711.3.2.

Non-fire-resistance rated floor and roof assemblies, although not fire rated, do have minimum construction and continuity requirements as described in this section.

711.3.1 Materials. Assemblies shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

At a minimum, the materials used to construct these floor and roof assemblies must be consistent with the materials required for the type of construction required based on the criteria in Chapters 5 and 6. For example, if a noncombustible type of construction is required, then the elements of the floor and roof assembly also must be noncombustible unless otherwise allowed by the code, such as the allowances of Section 603.

711.3.2 Continuity. Assemblies shall be continuous without vertical openings, except as permitted by Section 712.

Although these assemblies are not required to be fire rated, there is still a benefit to their being continuous. This benefit is a resistance to smoke migration. Openings are not prohibited and can be found in Section 712.

## SECTION 712 VERTICAL OPENINGS

712.1 General. Each vertical opening shall comply in accordance with one of the protection methods in Sections 712.1.1 through 712.1.16.

Section 712 lists the applications in which the code allows vertical openings between stories or levels within a building. The conditions that are necessary to allow the vertical openings are enumerated in this section, or the appropriate Sections are referenced. Please note that these are prescriptive options and are intended to be applied individually.

712.1.1 Shaft enclosures. Vertical openings contained entirely within a shaft enclosure complying with Section 713 shall be permitted.

The first condition through which vertical openings between stories are allowed is fully enclosing the opening in shaft wall construction complying with Section 713. These types of openings contain ducts, vents, piping, chutes or elevator hoistways. Stairways are also vertical openings between floors. Section 713 references Sections 1009 and 1022 for stairway enclosures and the exceptions to those enclosures.

712.1.2 Individual dwelling unit. Unconcealed vertical openings totally within an individual residential dwelling unit and connecting four stories or less shall be permitted.

The keyword in this section is “unconcealed.” Vertical openings in view of the occupants, such as open exit access stairs, are allowed. The unconcealed floor opening connecting no more than four stories within a dwelling unit is permitted without a shaft enclosure. This is generally consistent with the permitted omission of stairway enclosures in such uses in accordance with Item 2 to Section 1019.3.

712.1.3 Escalator openings. Where a building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, vertical openings for escalators shall be permitted where protected in accordance with Section 712.1.3.1 or 712.1.3.2.

Vertical openings containing escalators in buildings that are fully sprinklered in accordance with NFPA 13 are allowed under either of the two protection methods stated in Sections 712.1.3.1 and 712.1.3.2.

712.1.3.1 Opening size. Protection by a draft curtain and closely spaced sprinklers in accordance with NFPA 13 shall be permitted where the area of the vertical opening between stories does not exceed twice the horizontal projected area of the escalator. In other than Groups B and M, this application is limited to openings that do not connect more than four stories.

===== Page 0580 =====
Under this method a draft curtain is required to protect the vertical opening. The details of the draft curtain and sprinkler spacing are in NFPA 13. The size of the vertical opening cannot exceed twice the horizontal projection of the escalator (see Commentary Figure 712.1.3.1). This method allows such floor openings to occur for the full height of the building, regardless of the number of stories for Groups B and M. For all other occupancies, there is a four-story limitation (three floors permitted to contain openings). This is similar to Item 4 for exit access stairways in Section 1019.3.

712.1.3.2 Automatic shutters. Protection of the vertical opening by approved shutters at every penetrated floor shall be permitted in accordance with this section. The shutters shall be of noncombustible construction and have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1.5 hours. The shutter shall be so constructed as to close immediately upon the actuation of a smoke detector installed in accordance with Section 907.3.1 and shall completely shut off the well opening. Escalators shall cease operation when the shutter begins to close. The shutter shall operate at a speed of not more than 150 mm/s and shall be equipped with a sensitive leading edge to arrest its progress where in contact with any obstacle, and to continue its progress on release there from.

This method of protecting vertical openings containing escalators requires automatic shutters at each floor opening and is not limited as to height or occupancy [see Commentary Figure 712.1.3.2].

712.1.4 Penetrations. Penetrations, concealed and unconcealed, shall be permitted where protected in accordance with Section 714.

Vertical openings are formed at the penetrations of horizontal assemblies by pipe, tube, conduit, wire, cable and other utilities. The annular spaces around the penetrating item must be protected in accordance with Section 714.5 or the penetrating items must be in shafts meeting Section 712.1.1.

712.1.5 Joints. Joints shall be permitted where complying with Section 712.1.5.1 or 712.1.5.2, as applicable.

* Joints are allowed in floor and roof assemblies where protected in accordance with this Section.

712.1.5.1 Joints in or between horizontal assemblies.

Joints made in or between horizontal assemblies shall comply with Section 715. The void created at the intersection of a floor/ceiling assembly and an exterior curtain wall assembly shall be permitted where protected in accordance with Section 715.4.
* Joints, such as expansion or seismic, are additional forms of openings in horizontal assemblies and, therefore, must be considered with regard to maintaining the fire-resistance ratings of these floors or roofs. This section requires all joints that are located in rated horizontal assemblies to be protected by a joint system that has a fire-resistance rating and complies with the requirements of Section 715 (see commentary, Section 715). The provisions of this section also include the protection of joints/voids that may occur at the intersection of the horizontal assembly and an exterior wall.

712.1.5.2 Joints in or between nonfire-resistance-rated floor assemblies. Joints in or between floor assemblies without a required fire-resistance rating shall be permitted where they comply with one of the following:

1 The joint shall be concealed within the cavity of a wall.

2 The joint shall be located above a ceiling.
3 The joint shall be sealed, treated or covered with an approved material or system to resist the free passage of flame and the products of combustion.

Exception: Joints meeting one of the exceptions listed in Section 715.3.

This Section addresses joints in nonrated floor assemblies. The spread of fire from story to story is a concern for all buildings whether or not the floors are required to be fire-resistance rated. This is why shaft enclosures are required for buildings that do not have a requirement for fire-resistance-rated floors. Although applicable to fire-resistant joint systems, the exceptions in Section 715.1 are also applicable to joints in nonfire-resistance-rated floor assemblies.

712.1.6 Ducts and air transfer openings. Pentrations by ducts and air transfer openings shall be protected in accordance with Section 717. Grease ducts shall be protected in accordance with SBC 501.

* Ducts and air transfer openings for HVAC supply, return and exhaust through horizontal assemblies can be a source for the spread of smoke and fire from story to story. This section references Section 717.6, which states that the first option is to enclose the vertical ducts in shaft walls, but gives several other options as well (see commentary, Section 717.6).

712.1.7 Atrium. Atrium complying with Section 404 that connect two or more stories in Group I-2 or I-3 occupancies or three or more stories in other occupancies shall be permitted.

Exceptions:

===== Page 0581 =====
1. Atriums shall not be permitted within Group H occupancies.

2. Balconies or stories within Groups A-1, A-4 and A-5 and mezzanines that comply with Section 505 shall not be considered a story as it applies to this section.

The code defines an “Atrium” as an opening connecting two or more stories. Vertical openings connecting two or more stories in Group I-2 or I-3 occupancies or three or more stories in other occupancies may be allowed under the provisions and conditions in Section 404. For openings connecting only two stories, the provisions of Section 712.1.9 may also be used to allow vertical openings. Vertical openings consisting of unenclosed exit access stairs may also be allowed where meeting specific portions of Section 1019.

Atriums are not allowed in Group H occupancies, balconies or stories within Groups A-1, A-4 and A-5, and mezzanines that comply with Section 505.

712.1.8 Masonry chimney. Approved vertical openings for masonry chimneys shall be permitted where the annular space is fireblocked at each floor level in accordance with Section 718.2.5.

A masonry chimney must meet the requirements of Section 2113 in order to be approved. According to Section 718.2.5, the annular space surrounding the masonry chimney must be fireblocked with a material specifically tested in the form and manner intended for use to demonstrate its ability to remain in place and resist the free passage of flame and products of combustion. Furthermore, Section 2113.20 requires the annular space to be fireblocked with a noncombustible material at the ceiling and floor. This Section does not apply to factory-built fireplaces and chimneys. Factory-built chimneys require shaft enclosures where penetrating floors.

712.1.9 Two-story openings. In other than Groups I-2 and I-3, a vertical opening that is not used as one of the applications specified in this Section shall be permitted if the opening complies with all of the following items:

1 Does not connect more than two stories.

2 Does not penetrate a horizontal assembly that separates fire areas or smoke barriers that separate smoke compartments.

3 Is not concealed within the construction of a wall or a floor/ceiling assembly.

4 Is not open to a corridor in Group I and R occupancies.

5 Is not open to a corridor on nonsprinklered floors.
6 Is separated from floor openings and air transfer openings serving other floors by construction conforming to required shaft enclosures.

The floor-opening allowance described in this section is not applicable to Groups I-2 and I-3. A floor opening connecting two stories that is not covered by one of the other provisions for vertical openings in Section 712 may use this provision. This provision addresses the issue of floor openings that are not a part of the required means of egress, such as uncoincidental openings providing the same purpose as an atrium between two stories. Unlike the atrium provisions in Section 404, this section does not require sprinklers or smoke control. Such vertical openings cannot connect to exit access corridors in Group I or R because occupants can be sleeping, and the integrity of the corridor system is especially important under such conditions. For a sprinklered Group B occupancy, Commentary Figure 712.1.9 illustrates the vertical opening connecting to an exit access corridor.

Under this provision, such two-story vertical openings cannot be connected to any other floor opening that connects to an additional floor level. Such vertical openings must be separated from vertical openings serving other stories by construction that complies with this section for shaft enclosures. This requirement limits the use of this provision so that an opening between two stories does not openly communicate with another opening to an additional story and, therefore, interconnect three or more different levels.

712.1.10 Parking garages. Vertical openings in parking garages for automobile ramps, elevators and duct systems shall comply with Section 712.1.10.1, 712.1.10.2 or 712.1.10.3, as applicable.

Vertical openings between stories or tiers of parking in parking garages are permitted. It is impractical to consider not allowing those vertical openings created by the automobile ramps. While this section only applies to the vehicle ramps, Sections 712.1.15 and 712.1.10.3 apply to vertical openings for duct systems and elevator hoistways serving only the parking garage. Exit access stairways in enclosed parking garages may need enclosures if they do not meet one of the specific provisions in Section 1019.

712.1.10.1 Automobile ramps. Vertical openings for automobile ramps in parking garages shall be permitted where constructed in accordance with Sections 406.5 and 406.6.

The special code requirements in Sections 406.5 and 406.6 recognize the unique features

===== Page 0582 =====
of parking garages. Adherence to those sections will mitigate the concerns about vertical openings.

712.1.10.2 Elevators. Vertical openings for elevator hoistways in parking garages that serve only the parking garage, and complying with Sections 406.5 and 406.6, respectively, shall be permitted.

Vertical openings that contain elevator hoistways that only serve a parking garage (open or enclosed) need not be enclosed in fire-resistance-rated shaft construction. The tiered levels of parking are already open; therefore, to provide fire-resistance-rated construction for the hoist way enclosures serves no useful purpose. Please note that if the elevator hoist way serves floors that are not part of the parking garage, then the fire-resistance-rated shafts would be required throughout the entire length of the elevator hoist way.

712.1.10.3 Duct systems. Vertical openings for mechanical exhaust or supply duct systems in parking garages complying with Sections 406.5 and 406.6, respectively, shall be permitted to be unenclosed where such duct system is contained within and serves only the parking garage.

This section is similar to Section 712.1.10.2. Fire-resistance-rated shafts are not required for vertical duct work that is contained within and serves only the parking structure.

712.1.11 Mezzanine. Vertical openings between a mezzanine complying with Section 505, and the floor below shall be permitted.

Section 712.1.11 recognizes that vertical openings between a mezzanine and the floor below are actually an advantage. The limited-size mezzanine is considered a part of the story below in accordance with Section 505.1. The openness between the mezzanine level and the floor below allows smoke or other hazards to be readily observable to occupants of both levels.

712.1.12 Exit access stairways and ramps. Vertical openings containing exit access stairways or ramps in accordance with Section 1019 shall be permitted.

There are 10 separate conditions in Section 1019 that permit unenclosed exit access stairs or ramps. The vertical openings created by the unenclosed stairs that meet Section 1019 are allowed.

712.1.13 Openings. Vertical openings for floor fire doors and access doors shall be permitted where protected by Section 712.1.13.1 or 712.1.13.2.

Vertical openings can be provided with fire doors in the plane of the floor. The door can be automatic closing. The floor fire door requirement is detailed in Section 712.1.13.1. These floor fire doors can be used to close a floor opening because they have a fire-resistance rating equal to that of the floor and, therefore, meet requirements that are similar to those of the floor itself. It should be noted that floor fire door assemblies must be installed in fire-resistance-rated floors and non-fire-resistance-rated floors.

712.1.13.1 Horizontal fire door assemblies. Horizontal fire door assemblies used to protect openings in fire-resistance-rated horizontal assemblies shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 288 and shall achieve a fire-resistance rating not less than the assembly being penetrated. Horizontal fire door assemblies shall be labeled by an approved agency. The label shall be permanently affixed and shall specify the manufacturer, the test standard and the fire-resistance rating.

Horizontal fire doors are specifically addressed as an opening protective in horizontal floor assemblies. The code requires that these doors have a fire-resistance rating instead of just a fire protection rating. By requiring a fire-resistance rating, it will restore the opening in the horizontal assembly to the same level of protection that was originally established during the fire test by limiting the temperature transmission to the unexposed side of the assembly.

712.1.13.2 Access doors. Access doors shall be permitted in ceilings of fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling assemblies, provided that such doors are tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 as horizontal assemblies and labeled by an approved agency for such purpose.

Access doors are often necessary in order to service mechanical and plumbing systems above the ceiling. This section states that if such doors are used where the ceiling provides part of the protection, they must be tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 as a horizontal assembly. This makes it clear that the standard fire test for doors (NFPA 80 or 257) is not acceptable. This ensures that the thermal transmission through the access door and its effect on the assembly is considered. The provisions of this section are not applicable if the ceiling membrane does not provide any portion of the fire-resistive protection. Therefore, in a nonrated ceiling, this access door requirement would not apply.

712.1.14 Group I-3. In Group I-3 occupancies, vertical openings shall be permitted in accordance with Section 408.5.

Vertical openings within a Group I-3 housing unit are allowed under the conditions of Section

===== Page 0583 =====
408.5.1. This is to allow tiered cells with observation by supervisory personnel.

712.1.15 Skylights. Skylights and other penetrations through a fire-resistance-rated roof deck or slab are permitted to be unprotected, provided that the structural integrity of the fire-resistance-rated roof assembly is maintained. Unprotected skylights shall not be permitted in roof assemblies required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Section 705.8.6. The supporting construction shall be protected to afford the required fire-resistance rating of the horizontal assembly supported.

Fire-resistance-rated roof construction is not intended to create a barrier in order to contain the fire within the building, except for Exception 1 of Section 705.8.6 and the exception to Section 706.6.1. Non-fire-resistance-rated penetrations and skylight and roof window assemblies are, therefore, permitted to be installed in fire-resistance-rated roof assemblies, provided that the structural integrity of the roof assembly is not reduced and the provisions of Section 705.8.6 for protection of vertical exposure do not apply (see commentary, Section 705.8.6). The issue of structural integrity refers to the effect the collapse of a skylight assembly, under fire conditions, would have on the roof structure. Section 713.12, regarding the extension of a shaft to the roof level, would also permit the same unprotected openings to the exterior.

712.1.16 Openings otherwise permitted. Vertical openings shall be permitted where allowed by other sections of this code.

The code reference all the conditions that would allow vertical openings in this section. However, other vertical openings that are not referenced in this section is still permitted if referenced by other section of the code.

## SECTION 713 SHAFT ENCLOSURES

713.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to shafts required to protect openings and penetrations through floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling assemblies. Interior exit stairways and ramps shall be enclosed in accordance with Section 1023.

This section applies to vertical shafts enclosing vertical openings, such as vertical exhaust ducts; gas flues; metal chimneys; vertical supply ducts; return and outdoor air ducts; elevator hoistways, linen chutes and trash chutes. All openings or penetrations in floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies are required to be protected with a vertical shaft enclosure, except for the permitted uses in Section 712.
The purpose of shafts is to confine a fire to the floor of origin and to prevent the fire or the products of the fire (smoke, heat and hot gases) from spreading to other levels. For interior exit stairways and interior exit ramps, the requirements in Section 1023 are applicable.

713.2 Construction. Shaft enclosures shall be constructed as fire barriers in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Shafts are required to be enclosed in fire-resistance-rated fire barriers (Section 707) or a combination of fire barriers and horizontal assemblies (Section 711) where shafts are offset between stories.

713.3 Materials. The shaft enclosure shall be of materials permitted by the building type of construction.

Material used for the construction of shaft walls must comply with the material requirements for partitions based on the building construction type in Section 602.

713.4 Fire-resistance rating. Shaft enclosures shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours where connecting four stories or more, and not less than 1 hour where connecting less than four stories. The number of stories connected by the shaft enclosure shall include any basements but not any mezzanines. Shaft enclosures shall have a fire-resistance rating not less than the floor assembly penetrated but need not exceed 2 hours. Shaft enclosures shall meet the requirements of Section 703.2.1.1.

The required fire-resistance rating for a shaft enclosure is related to the number of stories being connected. Please note that the shaft enclosure is required to be fire-resistance rated even though the floor may not be required to be fire-resistance rated, such as in a Type IIB, IIIB or VB construction. The fire-resistance rating of shaft enclosures must be 2 hours in buildings four or more stories in height. The fire-resistance rating of shaft enclosures that connect less than four stories is required to be only 1 hour. However, in the case of Type IA or IB construction, the shaft enclosure for a building height of three stories or less would have to be 2 hours. That is because the floors are 2-hour fire-resistance rated in those types of construction. The fire-resistance integrity of the floor construction must be maintained. The shaft wall construction shall never be allowed to be less than the fire-resistance rating of the floors being penetrated but need not exceed 2 hours (see Commentary Figure 713.4). Another case where a two- or three-story building will require a 2-hour shaft enclosure is

===== Page 0584 =====
a mixed occupancy building using the separated option with a floor separating the occupancies rated for 2 hours.

There is one exception to the 2-hour fire-resistance rating for shaft enclosures in buildings meeting the high-rise provisions of Section 403. Section 403.2.1.2 which allows a reduction to 1 hour in high-rise buildings less than 128 m in height for shaft enclosures other than exits and elevator hoistways where special sprinklers are installed in the shaft. The intent of the reference to Section 703.2.1.1 is that fire-resistance-rated shaft enclosure walls must be rated for fire exposure from both sides. That is, they must be symmetrical assemblies or assume the rating of the least-rated side. Chase walls are not to be confused with shaft walls.

713.5 Continuity. Shaft enclosures shall be constructed as fire barriers in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both, and shall have continuity in accordance with Section 707.5 for fire barriers or Section 711.2.2 for horizontal assemblies, as applicable.

This section references the fire barrier and horizontal assembly provisions for details on the continuity requirements. For fire barriers, the continuity section is Section 707.5, which also contains the supporting structure provisions. For horizontal assemblies, Section 711.2.2 describes the continuity provisions. See the commentary for both of those sections. Nothing in this section prohibits offsets in shaft enclosures, provided that the enclosures are continuous to the roof.

713.6 Exterior walls. Where exterior walls serve as a part of a required shaft enclosure, such walls shall comply with the requirements of Section 705 for exterior walls and the fire-resistance-rated enclosure requirements shall not apply.

Exception: Exterior walls required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Section 1021.2, for exterior egress balconies, Section 1023.7, for interior exit stairways and ramps and Section 1027.6, for exterior exit stairways and ramps.

If an exterior wall constitutes part of a shaft enclosure, the exterior wall is only required to comply with the fire-resistance-rating requirements in Section 705 for exterior walls. The intent of the fire barrier requirements is to subdivide or enclose areas to protect them from a fire within the building. The exterior wall need only have a fire-resistance rating if required for structural stability (see Table 601) or because of an exterior exposure potential based on FSD. The exception in this Section recognizes that an exterior wall of a shaft can also be an egress balcony wall or a wall separating an exterior exit stair. Exterior balcony, exit enclosure and ramp and stair requirements are referenced by the exception as areas required to be fire-resistance rated for reasons other than structural or FSD. Section 702.1 also requires a wall serving multiple purposes to meet all the code requirements for each purpose.

713.7 Openings. Openings in a shaft enclosure shall be protected in accordance with Section 716 as required for fire barriers. Doors shall be self-or automatic closing by smoke detection in accordance with Section 716.2.6.6.

The integrity of the shaft enclosures must be maintained with approved opening protectives (see Section 716). An example of a protected opening is illustrated in Commentary Figure 713.7. Doors provided into shafts shall be self-closing or, if automatic closing, must be smoke activated in accordance with Section 716.2.6.6 Table 716.1(2) provides the fire protection rating required. There is no requirement for the doors to meet the smoke and draft control assembly testing, unless the shaft door also serves as an opening into a corridor or through a smoke barrier.

713.7.1 Prohibited openings. Openings other than those necessary for the purpose of the shaft shall not be permitted in shaft enclosures.

In fire barrier walls forming shaft enclosures, openings are limited to only those necessary for the shaft to serve its intended purpose.

713.8 Penetrations. Penetrations in a shaft enclosure shall be protected in accordance with Section 714 as required for fire barriers. Structural elements, such as beams or joists, where protected in accordance with Section 714 shall be permitted to penetrate a shaft enclosure.

Penetrations for items such as cables, cable trays, conduits, ducts and piping are required to be tested in accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479 with some minor exceptions (see Section 714.4.1).

Structural members are permitted to penetrate shaft walls if such members have been tested in the assembly and meet ASTM E814 and UL 1479. This is only applicable for shafts in Section 713 and does not address stair shafts or penetrations of fire barriers in general.

713.8.1 Prohibited penetrations. Penetrations other than those necessary for the purpose of the shaft shall not be permitted in shaft enclosures.

Exception: Membrane penetrations shall be permitted on the outside of shaft enclosures. Such penetrations shall be

===== Page 0585 =====
protected in accordance with Section 714.4.2.

The provisions of this Section mirror those of Section 713.7.1 for openings. Because a shaft provides a potential method for a fire or the products of combustion to spread throughout a building, especially when driven due to the stack effect, the code restricts penetrations so that the effectiveness of the shaft is maintained. For instance, horizontal plumbing piping cannot penetrate the walls of a shaft serving vertical air ducts. The exception allows for membrane penetrations protected as required by Section 714.4.2. It is recognized that protected membrane penetrations are a lower level of hazard when compared to protected through penetrations into a shaft enclosure.

713.9 Joints. Joints in a shaft enclosure shall comply with Section 715.

See the commentary to Section 715.

713.10 Duct and air transfer openings. Penetrations of a shaft enclosure by ducts and air transfer openings shall comply with Section 717.

These provisions reference the applicable protection features of Section 717 for duct openings. Since a duct is also a penetration, the limitations of Section 713.8.1 are applicable. For exit enclosures, it is important to note that duct openings are limited to those allowed in Section 1023.4. As stated in Section 717.1.2, if a duct is exempted from the need for a damper, the penetration of that duct through a fire-resistance-rated assembly must be protected as a through penetration in accordance with Section 714. Section 717.5.3 requires shaft enclosure penetrations by ducts and air transfer openings to be protected by both fire dampers and smoke dampers. For the exceptions, see the commentary to Section 717.5.3.

713.11 Enclosure at the bottom. Shafts that do not extend to the bottom of the building or structure shall comply with one of the following:

1 Be enclosed at the lowest level with construction of the same fire-resistance rating as the lowest floor through which the shaft passes, but not less than the rating required for the shaft enclosure.

2 Terminate in a room having a use related to the purpose of the shaft. The room shall be separated from the remainder of the building by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. The fire-resistance rating and opening protectives shall be not less than the protection required for the shaft enclosure.
3 Be protected by approved fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing at the lowest floor level within the shaft enclosure.

Exceptions:

1. The fire-resistance-rated room separation is not required, provided that the only openings in or penetrations of the shaft enclosure to the interior of the building occur at the bottom. The bottom of the shaft shall be closed off around the penetrating items with materials permitted by Section 718.3.1 for draftstopping, or the room shall be provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system.

2. A shaft enclosure containing a waste or linen chute shall not be used for any other purpose and shall discharge in a room protected in accordance with Section 713.13.4.

3. The fire-resistance-rated room separation and the protection at the bottom of the shaft are not required provided that there are no combustibles in the shaft and there are no openings or other penetrations through the shaft enclosure to the interior of the building.

In order to limit the spread of fire from story to story through vertical shafts, an enclosure is required throughout the length of the shaft, including the bottom, if the shaft does not extend to the bottom floor of the building. This section gives three separate methods of providing protection for the bottom of shafts that are not at the bottom of the building.

Method 1 is shown in Commentary Figure 713.11(1). Please note that the bottom of the shaft is supported by a horizontal assembly meeting the requirements of Section 711. However, if the horizontal structural members are primary structural frames and not secondary structural members, and the structural floor member supports shaft walls three stories or more in height, then individual encasement is required (see Section 704.3).

Method 2 is illustrated in Commentary Figure 713.11(2). This Figure shows a 1-hour fire-resistance-rated shaft, but this method is applicable to 2-hour fire-resistance-rated shafts as well, although the room separation would be 2 hours. This method recognizes that the purpose of some shafts cannot be accomplished if the bottom must be enclosed as in Method 1. Therefore, a room is permitted at the bottom of the shaft, but the function of the room must be related to the purpose of the shaft. Two common examples of this situation

===== Page 0586 =====
are mechanical rooms that have vents from the room to the roof and refuse chutes that terminate at a room at the bottom for collection. Exceptions 1 and 2 to this Section relate to this method.

Method 3 is similar to Method 1 but allows a fire damper to be provided at the bottom of the enclosure. Please note that this method predates the requirement for both smoke and fire dampers in ducts penetrating shaft walls (Section 717.5.3). The code user must comply with both code sections. Therefore, the code user must provide both fire and smoke dampers with this method unless the smoke damper is exempted by Section 717.5.3.

Exception 1 is illustrated by both Commentary Figure 713.11(3) and Figure 713.11(4). This is an exception to Method 2 and eliminates the need for the room to be separated. With this exception, there cannot be any openings or penetrations into the shaft enclosures anywhere except at the bottom and the top. A gas-fired appliance flue and a commercial kitchen exhaust duct are good examples.

Exception 2 is specific to waste, recycling or linen chute termination rooms and requires compliance with Section 713.13.4.

Exception 3 is illustrated by Commentary Figure 713.11(5). This is an exception to the entire section and to all three methods. While the figure shows a very small light well shaft in a three-story building, this exception is not limited to three stories and the size of the shaft is not limited. The area and volume of the shaft can be considered as part of the story in which the bottom of the shaft terminates. The conditions of the exception are based on the fact that the shaft contents will not contribute to the fuel load and that the shaft serves and connects to only one story the one in which it terminates. This is similar to an atrium with no openings except in the first story. Unlike an atrium, which is exempted from shaft enclosures, this actually is a shaft with shaft wall construction on all stories except the first.

713.12 Enclosure at top. The top of shaft enclosures shall comply with one of the following:

1 Extend to the underside of the roof sheathing, deck or slab of the building, and the roof assembly shall comply with the requirements for the type of construction as specified in Table 601.

2 Terminate below the roof assembly and be enclosed at the top with construction of the same fire-resistance rating as the topmost floor penetrated by the shaft, but not less than the fire-resistance rating required for the shaft enclosure.
3 Extend past the roof assembly and comply with the requirements of Section 1511.

Proper shaft enclosures must include all sides and the top unless the top of the shaft is also the roof of the building.

Three different conditions are identified for the top of a shaft enclosure in this section.

Regarding the first condition, the required rating for the top of the shaft that extends to the sheathing or roof deck must be consistent with the requirements of Table 601 and Section 711 for roof construction. The top of the shaft must be constructed using a horizontal assembly (see Section 711) with the proper fire-resistance rating. It may not be sufficient to simply take a fire barrier, such as the assembly used for the shaft wall, and turn it horizontally. The shaft enclosure can also terminate below the roof assembly or extend past the roof assembly.

The second condition requires that two minimum fire-resistance ratings be checked (that of the uppermost floor penetrated by the shaft and that of the shaft itself) and that the most restrictive be applied.

The requirements for the third condition state that where a shaft enclosure extends past the roof assembly, it meets the definition of a penthouse and must meet the requirements of Section 1510, Rooftop structures. It is common for elevator shafts to extend past the roof, and it deserves mention in Section 713.12.

713.12.1 Penthouse mechanical rooms. A fire/smoke damper shall not be required at the penetration of the rooftop structure where shaft enclosures extend up through the roof assembly into a rooftop structure conforming to Section 1511. Ductwork in the shaft shall be connected directly to HVAC equipment.

This Section allows a shaft to terminate above the roof, and ducts to connect the shaft to the HVAC equipment without any additional protection at the penetration of the roof when it is inside a rooftop structure permitted by Section 1510.

713.13 Waste, recycle and linen chutes and incinerator rooms. Waste, recycling and linen chutes shall comply with the provisions of NFPA 82, Chapter 6 and shall meet the requirements of Sections 712 and 713.13.1 through 713.13.6. Incinerator rooms shall meet the provisions of Sections 713.13.4 and 713.13.5.

Exception: Chutes serving and contained within a single dwelling unit.

Waste, recycle and linen-handling systems represent locations that provide rapid fire spread potential. The emphasis on the vertical chute systems in this Section is because such

===== Page 0587 =====
systems interconnect multiple stories and can contain combustible material. Additionally, these systems all too often receive an ignition source, such as discarded chemicals and materials capable of producing spontaneous combustion, smoking materials that have not been extinguished and hot ashes, embers and charcoal. Such systems are also subject to acts of vandalism. The construction, fire suppression and termination requirements of waste, recycle and linen-handling systems are interrelated in other code sections. The exception recognizes the small size, limited use and occupant control of refuse and laundry chutes commonly installed within dwelling units.

713.13.1 Waste, recycle and linen chute enclosures. A shaft enclosure containing a recycling, waste or linen chute shall not be used for any other purpose and shall be enclosed in accordance with Section 713.4. A shaft enclosure shall be permitted to contain recycling and waste chutes. Openings into the shaft, from access rooms and discharge rooms, shall be protected in accordance with this Section and Section 716. Openings into chutes shall not be located in corridors. Doors into chutes shall be self-closing. Discharge doors shall be self-or automatic-closing upon the actuation of a smoke detector in accordance with Section 716.2.6.6, except that heat-activated closing devices shall be permitted between the shaft and the discharge room.

This Section requires that vertical systems or chutes be enclosed in a fire-resistance-rated shaft in accordance with Section 713.4. As with all shafts, the fire-resistance integrity of the shaft must be protected at all penetrations of the shaft enclosure. All access openings and discharge points must be treated as shaft enclosure penetrations requiring opening protectives. Doors to waste, recycle and linen chutes cannot be located in corridors or exits. Access from a corridor or exit to a waste or linen chute must be via an intervening room (see Section 713.13.3) with an additional fire-rated opening protective. One shaft enclosure can contain both recycling and waste chutes based on the similarities in hazard.

713.13.2 Materials. A shaft enclosure containing a waste, recycling, or linen chute shall be constructed of materials as permitted by the building type of construction.

The types of materials used in shaft enclosures are to be consistent with Section 602 for the type of construction of the building. Fire barriers or horizontal assemblies that form shaft walls are permitted to be of combustible construction in Type III, IV and V construction and are required to be of noncombustible materials in Type I and II construction.

713.13.3 Chute access rooms. Access openings for waste, recycling or linen chutes shall be located in rooms or compartments enclosed by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. Openings into the access rooms shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating of not less than  \( \frac{3}{4} \)  hour. Doors shall be self- or automatic closing upon the detection of smoke in accordance with Section 716.2.6.6. The room or compartment shall be configured to allow the access door to the room or compartment to close and latch with the access panel to the chute in any position.

The chutes themselves must have a rated fire door with closers in accordance with Section 713.13.1. The fire door in the shaft wall must be rated for 60 minutes or 90 minutes depending on the height of the shaft enclosure. In addition to this protection, such openings into the chute shaft must be located in a room or compartment. This room or compartment must be enclosed by fire barrier walls (Section 707) and horizontal assemblies (Section 711) with fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour. The door openings into the access room shall be fire-resistance rated for 45 minutes (see Commentary Figure 713.13.3). This requirement is necessary to provide an added measure of protection. Such rooms typically contain a variety of combustible materials and shaft access doors can fail to close due to waste obstructions. Configuring the room or compartment to allow the access door to close and latch ensures that the room and door provide a minimum level of protection to the shaft enclosing the chute and the chute access doors.

713.13.4 Chute discharge room. Waste, recycling or linen chutes shall discharge into an enclosed room separated by fire barriers with a fire-resistance rating not less than the required fire rating of the shaft enclosure and constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. Openings into the discharge room from the remainder of the building shall be protected by opening protectives having a fire protection rating equal to the protection required for the shaft enclosure. Doors shall be self- or automatic closing upon the detection of smoke in accordance with Section 716.2.6.6. Waste chutes shall not terminate in an incinerator room. Waste

===== Page 0588 =====
and linen rooms that are not provided with chutes need only comply with Table 509.1.

The chute discharge rooms, like the access rooms, are a repository of combustible material, and thus must be separated from all other parts of the building by fire barriers (Section 707) and horizontal assemblies (Section 711). The fire-resistance ratings are the same as for the shaft enclosure. See also Exception 2 of Section 713.11, which allows the shaft to discharge into such a room. The incidental use separation requirements for waste and linen separation rooms in Table 509.1 are only applicable to collection rooms not connected to chutes. The discharge room must never be connected to an incinerator room.

713.13.5 Incinerator room. Incinerator rooms shall comply with Table 509.1.

This section refers to the incidental use separation table. Table 509.1 requires a 2-hour fire-resistance enclosure for such rooms and sprinkler protection.

713.13.6 Automatic sprinkler system. An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with Section 903.2.11.2.

In addition to meeting the requirements for shaft enclosures, laundry and refuse chutes must be provided with automatic sprinkler coverage. Most buildings with chutes will need to be fully sprinkled by other sections of the code. The chutes must have additional heads at the top, in the termination room and in the chute at every other floor level. The need for the sprinkler protection addresses the potential that a fire can occur in the chute or in the container below the chute.

713.14 Elevator, dumbbwater and other hoistways. Elevator, dumbbwater and other hoistway enclosures shall be constructed in accordance with sections 712 and 713, and Chapter 30.

The hoistway enclosure is the fixed structure consisting of vertical walls or partitions that isolates the enclosure from all other building areas or from an adjacent enclosure in which the hoist way doors and door assemblies are installed. With the exception of observation elevators (usually in atrium), the hoistway is normally enclosed with fire barriers (see Section 707.3.1). Elevator hoistways in all parking structures that serve only the parking structure are exempt from enclosures by Section 712.1.15. In addition, shaft enclosures are not required for elevators located in an atrium since the hoistways are not concealed and there is no penetration of floor assemblies. Elevator hoistways are enclosed to ensure that flame, smoke and hot gases from a fire do not have an avenue of travel from one floor to another through a concealed space (see the discussion of stack effect in the commentary to Section 3006.2). Enclosures are also provided to restrict contact with moving equipment and to prevent people from falling.

## SECTION 714 PENETRATIONS

714.1 Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the materials and methods of construction used to protect through penetrations and membrane penetrations of horizontal assemblies and fire-resistance-rated wall assemblies.

This section addresses the specific requirements for maintaining the integrity of fire-resistance-rated assemblies at penetrations. The provisions of this section apply to penetrations of fire-resistance-rated walls (see Section 714.4), fire-resistance-rated horizontal assemblies (see Section 714.5.1) and non-fire-resistance-rated assemblies (see Section 714.6). Penetrations of fire-resistance-rated assemblies range from combustible pipe and tubing to non-combustible wiring with combustible covering to non-combustible items such as pipe, tube, conduit and ductwork.

Each type of penetration requires a specific method of protection, which is based on the type of fire-resistance-rated assembly that is penetrated and the type of penetrating item. To determine the type of penetration protection required, the first step is to identify whether the penetrated assembly is a fire-resistance-rated wall, a fire-resistance-rated horizontal assembly or a non-fire-resistance-rated horizontal assembly. Next, identify the type of penetrating item in the applicable section and determine the applicable method of penetration protection necessary.

714.1.1 Ducts and air transfer openings. Penetrations of fire-resistance-rated walls by ducts that are not protected with dampers shall comply with Sections 714.3 through 714.4.3. Penetrations of horizontal assemblies not protected with a shaft as permitted by Section 717.6, and not required to be protected with fire dampers by other sections of this code, shall comply with Sections 714.4 through 714.6.2. Ducts and air transfer openings that are protected with dampers shall comply with Section 717.

Duct penetrations are typically protected with fire and smoke dampers in accordance with Section 717.5. However, if the code does not require them and the designer does not provide such dampers as they may interfere with the system design, this Section allows for such removal, provided that the penetration is protected as part of a tested assembly (see Section 714.4.1.1) or is protected with some

===== Page 0589 =====
type of through-penetration firestop system (see Section 714.3.1.2).

This Section coordinates with Section 717.1.2, which states the appropriate Section to go to in order to determine the proper protection for ducts where they penetrate a fire-resistance-rated wall assembly. Where ducts or air transfer openings penetrate a fire-resistance-rated wall assembly, fire dampers can be installed to maintain the rating of the assembly as required by Section 717. However, in addition to maintaining the fire-resistant integrity of the floor, wall or roof/ceiling assembly, the damper also serves an additional function as an active component of the fire management design. Unlike through-penetration firestop systems, fire dampers can restrict the spread of fire through the air duct system within a building to areas remote from the fire or into a building from the outside. In addition, the air duct system can be used for the purpose of emergency smoke control, either manually or automatically. Although fire dampers and through-penetration firestop systems both are intended to maintain the rating of the assembly at the point where an opening occurs for the ventilation system, they are not optional or equivalent alternatives for one another.

The placement (or the elimination) of fire dampers within the ventilation system is based on additional factors other than the point at which the duct penetrates a fire-resistance-rated assembly.

Other Sections of the code may permit fire dampers to be eliminated due to the installation of an automatic sprinkler system, or the design of a smoke control system. This Section addresses the protection of the fire rating of the assembly where such conditions occur and provides that the duct penetration is protected as part of a tested assembly (see Section 714.4.1.1), or is protected with some type of through-penetration firestop system (see Section 714.4.1.1), tested and listed for use on ducts without fire dampers.

714.2 Installation. A listed penetration firestop system shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and the listing criteria.

These provisions require that all listed systems be installed in accordance with the listing criteria and the manufacturer's instructions. The manufacturer's instructions often provide additional details that are not commonly identified in the listing criteria, including environmental conditions and tooling.

714.3 Installation details. Where sleeves are used, they shall be securely fastened to the assembly penetrated. The space between the item contained in the sleeve and the sleeve itself and any space between the sleeve and the assembly penetrated shall be protected in accordance with this section. Insulation and coverings on or in the penetrating item shall not penetrate the assembly unless the specific material used has been tested as part of the assembly in accordance with this section.

Sleeves are typically installed where the opening penetrates an assembly with interior voids, such as a steel stud framed wall. The sleeve must be securely fastened to the penetrated assembly to prevent the sleeve from becoming dislodged and adversely affecting the performance of the annular space protection. The space between the sleeve and the penetrating item, as well as between the sleeve and the rated assembly, must be protected in accordance with Section 714.4.1. Without attention to these conditions, a sleeved penetration may not perform as required by the code. A sleeve may also exist where a segment of plastic or metal pipe or tube is cast into a concrete floor, thus creating the needed opening for an anticipated penetration. In this case, the need for secure fastening to the underlying assembly is essentially guaranteed, and there would be no space needing to be sealed between the sleeve and the assembly being penetrated.

Section 714.4.1 requires that combustible penetrations be protected with assemblies that have been tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 (see Section 714.4.1.1), or ASTM E814 or UL 1479 (see Section 714.4.1.2). If a sleeve is used in conjunction with the penetrating items, then the annular space within and around the sleeve must also be protected with materials that meet the conditions of the test standards. The purpose of this section is to provide the building official with the necessary text to enforce the conditions of the penetration protection standards.

If combustible insulation material or coverings on the penetrating item could provide a path for the line of fire to travel through the assembly, the method of protection must have also been fire tested using that specific type and thickness of insulation. This Section clarifies that either the insulation or covering must be part of the tested assembly, whether the assembly was tested under ASTM E119 or UL 263 or is a through-penetration firestop system tested in accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479, or else the insulation or covering is not allowed to pass through the penetration. In the latter case, the insulation or covering should be removed from the penetrated item at the point

===== Page 0590 =====
of penetration through the fire-resistance-rated assembly, assuming that the removal would not cause other problems and that the removal would be compliant with other applicable codes [e.g., SBC 501 or SBC 701].

714.4 Fire-resistance-rated walls. Penetrations into or through fire walls, fire barriers, smoke barrier walls and fire partitions shall comply with Sections 714.4.1 through 714.4.3. Penetrations in smoke barrier walls shall also comply with Section 714.5.4.

In order to maintain the integrity of the fire-resistance-rated wall assembly (fire walls, fire barriers, smoke barriers and fire partitions), penetrations into and through the rated assembly must be properly protected. Acceptable protection methods for various penetrations of wall assemblies are identified in Sections 714.4.1 through 714.4.3. Additionally, penetrations of smoke barriers are required to meet the test requirements for air leakage given in Section 714.5.4.

714.4.1 Through penetrations. Through penetrations of fire-resistance-rated walls shall comply with Section 714.4.1.1 or 714.4.1.2.

Exception: Where the penetrating items are steel, ferrous or copper pipes, tubes or conduits, the annular space between the penetrating item and the fire-resistance-rated wall is permitted to be protected by either of the following measures:

1 In concrete or masonry walls where the penetrating item is a maximum 150 mm nominal diameter and the area of the opening through the wall does not exceed 0.1 m², concrete, grout or mortar is permitted where installed the full thickness of the wall or the thickness required to maintain the fire-resistance rating.

2 The material used to fill the annular space shall prevent the passage of flame and hot gases sufficient to ignite cotton waste when subjected to ASTM E 119 or UL 263 time-temperature fire conditions under a minimum positive pressure differential of 2.5 Pa at the location of the penetration for the time period equivalent to the fire-resistance rating of the construction penetrated.

Combustible cables, wires, pipes, tubes and conduits that penetrate fire-resistance-rated walls are required to be properly protected [see Commentary Figure 714.4.1(1) and Figure 714.4.1(2)]. These penetrations are required to be tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 (see Section 714.4.1.1) or ASTM E 814 or UL 1479 (see Section 714.4.1.2).
Because combustible materials have a greater propensity to spread fire through a penetration, the requirements for combustible penetrating items are considerably more restrictive than for noncombustible penetrating items, to which the exception can apply. Penetration of fire-resistance-rated walls by cables, wires, pipes, tubes, conduits and vents represents a weak link in the continuity of the required fire-resistance rating. These penetrations are to be protected with materials that will maintain the integrity of the wall for the duration of the required fire-resistance rating. In lieu of a system tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 (see Section 714.4.1.1), or ASTM E 814 or UL 1479 (see Section 714.4.1.2), penetrations with steel, ferrous or copper pipes, tubes or conduits may be protected by filling the annular space. Annular space protection is permitted for the protection of penetrations of wall assemblies by only the mentioned noncombustible items. "Annular space" is defined in Chapter 2 as the perimeter space between the penetrating item and the rated assembly. If sleeves are used, the annular space includes the space between the penetrating item and the sleeve, as well as the space between the sleeve and the rated assembly [see Commentary Figure 714.4.1(3)]. Item 1 of the exception permits the use of concrete, grout or mortar to provide annular space protection for certain penetrations of concrete and masonry wall assemblies. The concrete, grout or mortar must be provided for the full thickness of the wall, unless evidence can be provided that demonstrates that the required fire-resistance rating can be achieved with a lesser depth. Concrete, grout and mortar have traditionally been used as protection for the annular space in penetrations of concrete and masonry walls. Experience has shown this form of protection to be viable.

Concrete, grout and mortar have traditionally been used as protection for the annular space in penetrations of concrete and masonry walls.

Under Item 2 of the exception, because the penetrating items are limited and the annular space protection is not based on specific performance testing of each penetration arrangement and detail, the performance of the protection is dependent on the annular space protection material alone. As such, for walls other than concrete or masonry, Item 2 requires that the material be prequalified as to its ability to prevent the passage of flame and hot gases sufficient to ignite cotton waste when subjected to the time temperature criteria of ASTM E119 or UL 263. This is consistent with the criteria required for through-penetration protection systems (ASTM E814 or UL 1479) in which the T rating is not required. Since it is very likely that the penetration in an actual fire

===== Page 0591 =====
will be exposed to a positive pressure, this section specifies that the test fire exposure include a positive pressure of 2.5 Pa as a further means to verify the performance of this protection method as required by the code.

## 714.4.1.1 Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. Through penetrations shall be protected using systems installed as tested in the approved fire-resistance-rated assembly.

This section requires, as an option, that the tested assembly in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 include the penetrations along with the proposed type of protection. In other words, the entire assembly is tested. As an option, this section is not used frequently due to the limitations placed on the tested assembly relative to its application. Penetration protection is most often provided in accordance with the exception to Section 714.4.1 and the provisions of Section 714.4.1.2.

714.4.1.2 Through-penetration firestop system. Through penetrations shall be protected by an approved penetration firestop system installed as tested in accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479, with a minimum positive pressure differential of 2.49 Pa) of water and shall have an F rating of not less than the required fire-resistance rating of the wall penetrated.

In order to maintain effective compartmentation of a building to restrict the spread of fire, all penetrations through fire-resistance-rated assemblies must be protected. In recent history, there have been several examples of buildings where extensive fire damage and loss of life was attributed, at least in part, to lack of or improper installation of penetration protection. In the absence of a through-penetration firestop system to protect penetrations of fire-resistance-rated assemblies, the potential exists for fire to spread beyond the initial area of fire origin. One report on the origin of fires in buildings indicated that 23 percent of all building fires originate from electrical systems. This fact, coupled with the number of penetrations through walls and floors created by electrical distribution piping, helps to underscore the necessity of protection for all penetrations through rated assemblies. It must be noted that penetrations are not limited to electrical systems only, but that openings to accommodate plumbing and mechanical systems also contribute to the number of penetrations through any given assembly.

A through-penetration firestop system consists of specific materials or an assembly of materials that are designed to restrict the passage of fire and hot gases for a prescribed period of time through openings made in fire-resistance-rated walls or horizontal assemblies. In certain instances, the through-penetration firestop system is also required to limit the transfer of heat from the fire side to the unexposed side. In order to determine the effectiveness of a through-penetration firestop system in restricting the passage of fire and the transfer of heat, firestop systems are required to be subjected to fire testing. ASTM E814 and UL 1479 are the test methods developed specifically for the evaluation of a firestop system's ability to resist the passage of flame and hot gases, withstand thermal stresses and restrict transfer of heat through the penetrated assembly.

The basic provisions of ASTM E814 and UL 1479 require that a test assembly consisting of a specific wall or floor construction, containing through penetrations of various types and sizes, be constructed. The through-penetration firestop system to be tested is installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions around the penetrations. The test assembly is then exposed to a test fire that corresponds to the time-temperature curve established by ASTM E119 or UL 263 (see the commentary to Section 703.2 for more discussion on ASTM E119 or UL 263). After the fire test exposure, the through-penetration firestop system is subjected to a hose stream, which evaluates the ability of the through-penetration firestop system to resist the effects of erosion and thermal shock. After completion of the ASTM E814 or UL 1479 procedure, two ratings for the test subject are established, which indicate how the test specimen withstands exposure to the test fire for a specified period of time.

Ratings for the through-penetration firestop system are generated based on the results of the testing and are reported as an F (flame) rating and a T (temperature) rating. The F rating indicates the period of time, in hours, the tested through-penetration firestop system remained in place without allowing the passage of fire during exposure or water during the hose stream. The T rating indicates the time, in hours, it took for the temperature, as recorded by thermocouples placed at specified locations on the unexposed side of the test assembly, to reach  \( 162^{\circ} \) C above ambient. It must be noted that in order to obtain a T rating, the system must first obtain an F rating. F ratings are required for all through-penetration firestop systems and must be equal to the fire-resistance rating of the assembly penetrated. A T rating is not required for wall penetrations, but a minimum of 1 hour is required where the through-penetration firestop system is installed in a floor assembly where the penetrating item

===== Page 0592 =====
is a pipe, tube or conduit that is in direct contact with a combustible material. This requirement is intended to minimize the potential for ignition of the combustible material on the unexposed side of the assembly due to elevated temperatures transmitted via the pipe, tube or conduit.

An ASTM International (ASTM) standard practice is available that can be used in cases where a standardized methodology is desired for the inspection of installed through-penetration firestop systems. Such a standardized procedure can be particularly useful in cases where a third-party inspection firm is used. ASTM E2174, Standard Practice for On-site Inspection of Installed Firestops, includes items such as preconstruction meetings to review submittals, details, variances, building mock-ups for destructive testing and scheduling witnessed inspection of a specified percentage of installations or conducting destructive testing on a specified percentage of installations. This standard practice also identifies what actions should be taken based on the percentage of noncompliant installations identified, as well as providing a standardized reporting form.

Two of the most common types of materials used in through-penetration firestop systems are intumescent and endothermic materials. Intumescent materials expand to approximately eight to 10 times their original volume when exposed to temperatures exceeding 121°C. The expansion of the material fills the voids or openings within the penetration to resist the passage of flame, while the outer layer of the expanded intumescent material forms an insulating charred layer that assists in limiting the transfer of heat. The expansion properties of intumescent materials allow them to seal openings left by combustible penetrating items that burn away during a fire, but do not retard heat as well as endothermic materials. Intumescent materials are typically used with combustible penetrating items or where a higher T rating is not required.

Endothermic materials provide protection through chemically bound water released in the form of steam when exposed to temperatures exceeding  \( 316^{\circ} \) C. This released water provides a cooling of the penetration and retards heat transfer through the penetration. Endothermic materials tend to be superactively resistant to heat transfer and have higher T ratings, but do not expand to fill voids left by combustible penetrating items that burn away during a fire. Endothermic materials are, therefore, typically used with noncombustible penetrating items and where a higher T rating is required.

714.4.2 Membrane penetrations. Membrane penetrations shall comply with Section 714.4.1. Where walls or partitions are required to have a fire-resistance rating, recessed fixtures shall be installed such that the required fire resistance will not be reduced.

## Exceptions:

1. Membrane penetrations of maximum 2-hour fire-resistance-rated walls and partitions by steel electrical boxes that do not exceed 0.01 m² in area, provided the aggregate area of the openings through the membrane does not exceed 0.065 m² in any 10 m² of wall area. The annular space between the wall membrane and the box shall not exceed 3.2 mm. Such boxes on opposite sides of the wall or partition shall be separated by one of the following:

1.1. By a horizontal distance of not less than 600 mm where the wall or partition is constructed with individual noncommunicating stud cavities.

1.2. By a horizontal distance of not less than the depth of the wall cavity where the wall cavity is filled with cellulose loose fill, rockwool or slag mineral wool insulation.

1.3. By solid fireblocking in accordance with Section 718.2.1.

1.4. By protecting both outlet boxes with listed putty pads; or

1.5. By other listed materials and methods.

2. Membrane penetrations by listed electrical boxes of any material, provided such boxes have been tested for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies and are installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing. The annular space between the wall membrane and the box shall not exceed 3.2 mm unless listed otherwise. Such boxes on opposite sides of the wall or partition shall be separated by one of the following:

2.1. By the horizontal distance specified in the listing of the electrical boxes.

2.2. By solid fireblocking in accordance with Section 718.2.1.

2.3. By protecting both boxes with listed putty pads; or

2.4. By other listed materials and methods.

3. Membrane penetrations by electrical boxes of any size or type, that have been listed as part of a wall opening protective material

===== Page 0593 =====
system for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies and are installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing.

4. Membrane penetrations by boxes other than electrical boxes, provided that such penetrating items and the annular space between the wall membrane and the box, are protected by an approved membrane penetration firestop system installed as tested in accordance with ASTM E 814 or UL 1479, with a minimum positive pressure differential of 2.49 Pa, and shall have an F and T rating of not less than the required fire-resistance rating of the wall penetrated and be installed in accordance with their listing.

5. The annular space created by the penetration of an automatic sprinkler, provided it is covered by a metal escutcheon plate.

6. Membrane penetrations of maximum 2-hour fire resistance-rated walls and partitions by steel electrical boxes that exceed 0.01 m² in area, or steel electrical boxes of any size having an aggregate area through the membrane exceeding 0.065 m² in any 10 m² of wall area, provided that such penetrating items are protected by listed putty pads or other listed materials and methods and installed in accordance with the listing.

“Membrane penetrations” are defined in Section 202 as “a breach in one side of a floor/ceiling, roof/ceiling or wall assembly to accommodate an item installed into or passing through the breach.” Therefore, they are different from a through penetration in that they do not pass through the entire assembly. Membrane penetrations are treated similarly to through penetrations. Specifically, noncombustible conduits, pipes and tubes that penetrate only one membrane of a fire-resistance-rated wall assembly are required to have the annular space protected in accordance with Section 714.4.1 or comply with the exception of that section. Combustible penetrations through only one membrane of a wall assembly would require either a tested assembly (see Section 714.4.1.1) or a through-penetration firestop system that complies with Section 714.4.1.2 for the penetrated membrane.

Penetrations, such as electrical outlet boxes, can affect the fire-resistance rating of an assembly. The criteria in Exception 1 [see Commentary Figure 714.4.2(1)] limits the size of steel electrical outlet boxes 0.01 m² and the amount allowed in a 10 m² area 0.065 m². Although not directly stated in the code, based on the supporting text in one of the legacy codes, when membrane penetrations of electrical outlet boxes were first regulated in 1979, it would appear that the original intent was to permit 0.065 m² of openings on each side of a 10 m² wall section. These criteria are consistent with the criteria determined from fire tests that have generally shown that, within these limitations, these penetrations will not adversely affect the fire-resistance rating of the wall. The design information section of the UL Fire Resistance Directory states that the opening in a wallboard facing is to be cut such that the clearance between the box and the wallboard does not exceed 3.2 mm.

Electrical outlet boxes of steel or materials other than steel (see Exception 2) can be utilized in the fire-resistance-rated wall if they have been specifically tested as part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly. Steel outlet boxes that exceed the size limitations of Exception 1 would also require the same pre-qualification by testing. Exceptions 1 and 2 also allow electrical boxes on opposite sides of the wall if they meet one of several criteria, such as separation by a horizontal distance of 600 mm. Exception 3 relates to electrical boxes listed as part of an assembly by a testing agency. Certification and listing agencies have published listings covering proprietary compositions that are used to maintain the hourly ratings of fire-resistant walls and partitions incorporating flush-mounted devices, such as outlet boxes, electrical cabinets and mechanical cabinets penetrating membranes of fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The individual systems indicate the specific applications and the method of installation for which the materials have been evaluated. The basic standards used to investigate these products are UL 263 and ASTM E119. For example, UL classifies these materials and systems as "wall opening protective materials." This category includes classifications for both generic steel electrical boxes as well as specific types and models of outlet and switch boxes composed of other materials, all listed for specific usage in fire-resistance-rated wall assemblies. The UL listings for wall opening protective materials indicate that, depending upon the testing conducted for the individual listing, their use can allow for any combination of:

1. Reducing the spacing between boxes contained on opposite sides of the wall.
2. Increasing the size of the boxes.

3. Increasing the density of the boxes.

===== Page 0594 =====
4. Allowing the use of boxes on each side of staggered stud walls.

Because these systems are tested for the specific end-use applications, the individual and aggregate restrictions on maximum sizes and quantities i.e., 10,300 mm \( ^{2} \)  for an individual box, and the aggregate maximum of 64,500 mm \( ^{2} \)  per 9 m \( ^{2} \)  are not required for these systems to maintain the fire-resistance ratings of the assemblies penetrated.

Exception 4 creates a direct parallel between the requirements for electrical outlet boxes and other membrane penetration boxes, such as dryer exhaust boxes, washing machine hose connection boxes, fire or police alarm boxes, manual fire alarm boxes, switch boxes, valve boxes, special purpose boxes, electrical panels and hose cabinets. The protection systems are to be tested for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies and installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listings. Because these utility boxes can exceed 64500 mm \( ^{2} \)  aggregate area, however, both an F and T rating are required in order to be directly equivalent to the fire-resistance rating of the assemblies penetrated. Given that these are membrane penetrations, there is a greater likelihood that someone could unknowingly place or store combustible materials, potentially even furniture and bedding, directly in contact with the un-penetrated membrane on the opposite side of the wall. This could significantly increase threat of a fire spread. The information provided for each classification would include the model numbers for the products, a description of the rated assemblies, the spacing limitations for the boxes and the installation details.

Exception 5 provides an alternative to the annular space protection provisions of Section 714.4.1 for fire sprinklers that penetrate a single membrane, provided that the annular space around the fire sprinkler head or fitting is completely covered by an escutcheon plate of noncombustible material [see Commentary Figure 714.4.2(2)]. The nature of the hazard posed by single membrane penetrations of sprinkler piping is limited due to the size of the opening, the potential amount of openings and the presence of a sprinkler system. The installation of a noncombustible escutcheon provides protection against free passage of fire through the annular space as well as allowing for the movement of sprinkler piping without breaking during a seismic event. Wall-mounted sprinkler heads installed back-to-back in fire-resistance-rated walls would be treated as through penetrations and not membrane penetrations.
Exception 6 reflects a common practice. This exception permits an additional allowance for steel electrical boxes exceeding 0.01 m² in size and exceeding an aggregate area through the membrane of 0.065 m² in any 9 m² of wall area based on testing and listing of the protection methods. The protection methods include putty pads, or other such listed materials installed consistent with the listing.

714.4.3 Dissimilar materials. Noncombustible penetrating items shall not connect to combustible items beyond the point of fire-stopping unless it can be demonstrated that the fire-resistance integrity of the wall is maintained.

This section limits the common practice of using a short metal nipple to penetrate a rated assembly, fire-stopping for the metal penetration (which is substantially less expensive than fire-stopping for plastic) and then connecting to plastic pipe or conduit on the room side of the wall. Arguably, there is a distance at which such connection is safe. However, this distance is variable and cannot be specified in the body of the code, hence the requirement for demonstration of fire-resistance integrity. An identical provision is found in Section 714.5.3 regarding penetrations of horizontal assemblies.

714.5 Horizontal assemblies. Penetrations of a fire-resistance-rated floor, floor/ceiling assembly or the ceiling membrane of a roof/ceiling assembly not required to be enclosed in a shaft by Section 712.1 shall be protected in accordance with Sections 714.5.1 through 714.5.4.

Penetrations of horizontal assemblies are required to be protected by a shaft enclosure unless otherwise exempted by Section 712.1. The acceptable methods by which a floor or roof assembly can be interrupted by a penetration are identified in Sections 714.5.1 through 714.5.4.

As noted in the commentary to Section 711, roof construction that is required to have a fire-resistance rating is intended to minimize the threat of premature structural failure of the roof construction under fire conditions and not to create a barrier to contain fire within the building. Section 712.1.15 permits unprotected penetrations in fire-resistance-rated roof assemblies, provided that the structural integrity of the roof assembly is not reduced.

714.5.1 Through penetrations. Through penetrations of horizontal assemblies shall comply with Section 714.5.1.1 or 714.5.1.2.

Exceptions:

1. Penetrations by steel, ferrous or copper conduits, pipes, tubes or vents or concrete or masonry items through a single fire-

===== Page 0595 =====
resistance-rated floor assembly where the annular space is protected with materials that prevent the passage of flame and hot gases sufficient to ignite cotton waste when subjected to ASTM E 119 or UL 263 time-temperature fire conditions under a minimum positive pressure differential of 2.5 Pa at the location of the penetration for the time period equivalent to the fire-resistance rating of the construction penetrated. Penetrating items with a maximum 150 mm nominal diameter shall not be limited to the penetration of a single fire-resistance-rated floor assembly, provided the aggregate area of the openings through the assembly does not exceed 92,900 mm \( ^{2} \)  in any 10 m \( ^{2} \)  of floor area.

2. Penetrations in a single concrete floor by steel, ferrous or copper conduits, pipes, tubes or vents with a maximum 150 mm nominal diameter, provided the concrete, grout or mortar is installed the full thickness of the floor or the thickness required to maintain the fire-resistance rating. The penetrating items shall not be limited to the penetration of a single concrete floor, provided the area of the opening through each floor does not exceed 92,900 mm \( ^{2} \) .

3. Penetrations by listed electrical boxes of any material, provided that such boxes have been tested for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies and installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing.

The code addresses the penetration of fire-resistance-rated horizontal separations in much the same way as penetrations through vertical assemblies. Specifically, the penetrations are required to either be part of a total assembly or be protected with a through-penetration firestop system (see commentary, Section 714.4.1).

Exception 1 is similar to Item 2 of the exception to Section 714.4.1. This exception allows the noncombustible penetrating item to connect two stories (penetrate one floor), regardless of the size of the penetrating item [see Commentary Figure 714.5.1(1)]. Where the size of the individual penetration 150 mm diameter and the aggregate area 0.1 m \( ^{2} \)  is limited in any 9 m \( ^{2} \) , the code allows such penetrations of noncombustible construction to be through an unlimited number of floors.

Exception 2 allows a 150 mm diameter penetration through a concrete floor similar to Item 1 in the exception to Section 714.4.1. Where the area of the penetration is limited to 92900 mm², such a penetration is permitted to be through an unlimited number of floors [see Commentary Figure 714.5.1(2) for methods of annular space protection for Exceptions 1 and 2].

Exception 3 mirrors Exception 2 to Section 714.4.2 for membrane penetrations but is applicable to through penetrations of a horizontal assembly, provided that the outlet box has been tested.

714.5.1.1 Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. Through penetrations shall be protected using systems installed as tested in the approved fire-resistance-rated assembly.

This section addresses membrane penetrations that were tested as a part of the normal fire test of the assembly (see commentary, Section 714.4.1.1).

714.5.1.2 Through-penetration firestop system. Through penetrations shall be protected by an approved through-penetration firestop system installed and tested in accordance with ASTM E 814 or UL 1479, with a minimum positive pressure differential of 2.49 Pa. The system shall have an F rating/T rating of not less than 1 hour but not less than the required rating of the floor penetrated.

Exceptions:

1. Floor penetrations contained and located within the cavity of a wall above the floor or below the floor do not require a T rating.

2. Floor penetrations by floor drains, tub drains or shower drains contained and located within the concealed space of a horizontal assembly do not require a T rating.

3. Floor penetrations of maximum 100 mm nominal diameter metal conduit or tubing penetrating directly into metal-enclosed electrical power switchgear do not require a T rating.

This section differs slightly from Section 714.4.1.2 for wall penetrations in that a T rating is required for penetrations of horizontal assemblies, but is not required for penetrations of wall assemblies (see commentary, Section 714.4.1.2).

Where permitted as an alternative to a shaft enclosure, cables, cable trays, conduits, tubes and pipes may penetrate a floor assembly where an approved through-penetration firestop system is used. An approved through-penetration firestop system is one that has been tested in accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479. The test method determines the performance of the protection system with respect to exposure to a standard time-

===== Page 0596 =====
temperature fire and hose stream test. The performance of the protection system is dependent on the specific assembly of materials tested, including the number, type and size of penetrations and the types of floors or walls in which the system is installed. It should also be noted that tests have been conducted at various pressure differentials; however, the current criterion used is 2.5 Pa of water gauge, and only tests with such minimum pressure throughout the test period are to be accepted. In evaluating test reports, the building official must determine whether the tested assembly is truly representative of the manner in which the system is to be installed. It should be noted that the ASTM E814 and UL 1479 test establishes two ratings: the F rating, which identifies the ability of the material to resist the passage of flame, and the T rating, which identifies the thermal transmission characteristics of the material or assembly. Exception 1 is intended to set aside the T-rating requirement where the penetrating item is located in a cavity of a wall and is separated from contact with adjacent materials in the occupiable floor area.

Exception 2 allows floor penetrations for plumbing drains located within a concealed horizontal assembly without a T rating. Meeting the T-rating requirement can be very challenging for penetrants that are metallic and therefore conduct heat. A through-penetration firestop system for such penetrants would not typically meet the T-rating requirement simply by sealing the penetrant within the floor. Additional insulation or covering of the through penetrant is typically required above and below the floor to prevent heat transmission via the penetrant. Listings for through penetration firestop systems will indicate the T rating obtained for any specific system. Commentary Figure 714.5.1.2 shows an example of typical firestop details that would be needed for a cable bundle to meet the T rating requirement of Section 714.5.1.2. For other types of metallic penetrants, listed systems with suitable T ratings would typically have insulation wrapped around the penetrant for some distance above and below the floor. Exception 3 permits an additional exception for metallic conduit or tubing penetrating a horizontal assembly that directly enters a metal-enclosed power switchgear assembly. NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401) defines a metal-enclosed power switchgear as a switchgear assembly completely enclosed on all sides and top with sheet metal (except for ventilating openings and inspection windows), and containing primary power circuit switching, interrupting devices or both, with buses and connections. The assembly may include control and auxiliary devices. Access to the interior of the enclosure is provided by doors, removable covers or both. These devices consist of a substantial metal structure and a sheet metal enclosure. NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401) further requires that, where installed over a combustible floor, suitable protection to the floor and clearances for cable conductors entering these enclosures must be provided. The unobstructed space opposite terminals, raceways or cables entering a switchgear or control assembly must be adequate for the type of conductor and method of termination. Because the penetrating item (EMT) goes through the floor and enters directly into these robust enclosures, it is reasonable to provide an exemption to the T-rating requirements of the code in these conditions.

714.5.2 Membrane penetrations. Penetrations of membranes that are part of a horizontal assembly shall comply with Section 714.5.1.1 or 714.5.1.2. Where floor/ceiling assemblies are required to have a fire-resistance rating, recessed fixtures shall be installed such that the required fire resistance will not be reduced.

## Exceptions:

1. Membrane penetrations by steel, ferrous or copper conduits, pipes, tubes or vents, or concrete or masonry items where the annular space is protected either in accordance with Section 714.5.1 or to prevent the free passage of flame and the products of combustion. The aggregate area of the openings through the membrane shall not exceed 64,500 mm² in any 10 m² of ceiling area in assemblies tested without penetrations.

2. Ceiling membrane penetrations of maximum 2-hour horizontal assemblies by steel electrical boxes that do not exceed 10300 mm² in area, provided the aggregate area of such penetrations does not exceed 64500 mm² in any 10 m² of ceiling area, and the annular space between the ceiling membrane and the box does not exceed 3.2 mm.

3. Membrane penetrations by electrical boxes of any size or type, that have been listed as part of an opening protective material system for use in horizontal assemblies and are installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing.

4. Membrane penetrations by listed electrical boxes of any material, provided that such

===== Page 0597 =====
boxes have been tested for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies and are installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing. The annular space between the ceiling membrane and the box shall not exceed 3.2 mm unless listed otherwise.

5. The annular space created by the penetration of a fire sprinkler, provided that it is covered by a metal escutcheon plate.

6. Noncombustible items that are cast into concrete building elements and that do not penetrate both top and bottom surfaces of the element.

7. The ceiling membrane of a maximum 2-hour fire-resistance-rated horizontal assemblies is permitted to be interrupted with the double wood top plate of a wall assembly that is sheathed with Type X gypsum wallboard, provided that all penetrating items through the double top plates are protected in accordance with Section 714.5.1.1 or 714.5.1.2 and the ceiling membrane is tight to the top plates.

8. Ceiling membrane penetrations by listed luminaires (light fixtures) or by luminaires protected with listed materials, which have been tested for use in fire-resistance-rated assemblies and are installed in accordance with the instructions included in the listing.

Penetrations of fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling assemblies that have a ceiling membrane as a component of the tested assembly, such as steel or wood joist assemblies using acoustical tiles or gypsum wallboard, are limited to those penetrations that are listed in the tested assembly (see Section 714.5.1.1) or those protected in accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479 [see Section 714.5.1.2 and Commentary Figure 714.5.2(1)]. Penetrations of a ceiling membrane by items that are not part of a tested assembly create a point for possible fire penetration into the space above the ceiling membrane, which in turn could jeopardize the fire-resistance rating of the assembly. The exceptions contain protection requirements for specific types of penetrations that are not required to be part of the tested assembly.

Exception 1 allows for a maximum aggregate amount of noncombustible pipe, tube, vents and conduit penetrations of a floor or ceiling that is part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly to be 0.065 m² per 9 m² of ceiling area. The annular space of the penetration can be protected by either annular space protection (see Exception 1 of Section 714.5.1) or a through-penetration firestop system tested to ASTM E814 or UL 1479 [see Section 714.5.1.2 and Commentary Figure 714.5.2(2)].

Annular space protection is not an option for combustible items because it does not have the ability to protect the resulting void created when the combustible penetrating item burns away.

Exception 2 allows penetrations of electrical outlet boxes that can affect the fire-resistance rating of an assembly. The criteria of this Section limit the size of noncombustible electrical outlet boxes that penetrate a ceiling membrane to 625 mm \( ^{2} \)  and an aggregate area that shall not exceed 64500 mm \( ^{2} \)  in 10 m \( ^{2} \)  of ceiling area. Opening at outlet penetrations are required to be protected as mentioned previously. The area limitations are consistent with the criteria determined from fire tests, which have shown that within these limitations, these penetrations will not adversely affect the fire-resistance rating of the floor/ceiling assembly.

The exception permits electrical outlet boxes and fittings, which have been evaluated and found suit-able for this purpose, to be located in the floor or ceiling of the fire-resistance-rated assembly. Reference sources for fire-resistance-rated assemblies, such as the UL Fire Resistance Directory, state that certain tested floor assemblies will permit the installation of electrical and communication connection inserts that appear in the UL listing category "Outlet Boxes and Fittings Classified for Fire Resistance" without reducing the fire-resistance rating of the assembly. However, classified outlet boxes and fittings installed in floor/ceiling assemblies that do not specify their use will jeopardize the rating unless compensating protection is provided.

Exception 3 is related to membrane penetrations of fire-resistance-rated assemblies by electrical boxes of any size or type that have been listed for their particular use in a horizontal assembly.

Certification and listing agencies have published listings covering proprietary compositions that are used to maintain the hourly ratings of fire-resistant assemblies incorporating flush-mounted devices, such as outlet boxes, electrical cabinets and mechanical cabinets penetrating membranes of fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The individual systems indicate the specific applications and method of installation for which the materials have been evaluated. The basic standards used to investigate these products are ANSI/UL 263 and ASTM E119.

===== Page 0598 =====
For example, UL classifies nonmetallic outlet boxes for installation in floors and ceilings in accordance with the provisions of NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401). These systems are required to provide a degree of fire resistance where installed in specific floor assemblies. Listing information includes the model numbers for the products, a description of the rated assemblies in which they can be used, the spacing limitations for the boxes and the installation details.

Exception 4 is similar to Exception 3 and probably could be combined. This exception addresses the annular space between the box and the ceiling membrane and limits it to 3.2 mm unless listed otherwise.

Exception 5 covers fire sprinkler heads in fire-resistant ceiling membranes and allows them without any testing where they are installed with metal ecutcheon plates. This is identical to the membrane wall penetration for sprinkler heads in Exception 5 to Section 714.4.2 [see Commentary Figure 714.4.2(2)].

Exception 6 allows any noncombustible penetration that is cast into a concrete floor slab, provided that it penetrates only one surface (top or bottom). It may penetrate the top surface or the bottom surface, but not both. Exception 7 is very important because it allows a common construction practice not only for 1- and 2-hour fire-resistance-rated horizontal assemblies. There are cases where the fire-resistance rating of the horizontal assembly may be 90 minutes, 45 minutes or 30 minutes. For instance, a 1- or 2-hour fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly is tested and rated with a continuous 16 mm gypsum wallboard ceiling. In conventional light platform framing, the bearing walls and nonbearing walls are framed with floor joists typically resting directly on studs. The ceiling membrane is then attached, which creates a membrane penetration where the top wall plates intersect the floor joists. This was previously a matter not provided for in the codes, requiring special analysis to be submitted to the building official for specific approval. This exception allows this typical framing detail, but gives special requirements. The wall must have double top plates (two-2Xs) and the wall must be sheathed with Type X gypsum wallboard.

Exception 8 recognizes listed recessed incandescent and fluorescent can lights, or enclosure materials that protect recessed can or troffer light fixtures that have been tested as a ceiling membrane penetration of fire-resistant-horizontal assemblies. There are currently several listed can lights incorporating integral fire protection that have been evaluated for use in fire-resistance-rated horizontal assemblies. Similarly, there are several listed enclosure materials that have been evaluated for their ability to protect penetrations in ceiling membranes by nonfire-resistance-rated can lights or troffer light fixtures.

714.5.3 Dissimilar materials. Noncombustible penetrating items shall not connect to combustible materials beyond the point of fire-stopping unless it can be demonstrated that the fire-resistance integrity of the horizontal assembly is maintained.

This section mirrors that of Section 714.4.3 for direct penetrations through walls (see commentary, Section 714.4.3).

714.5.4 Penetrations in smoke barriers. Penetrations in smoke barriers shall be protected by an approved through-penetration firestop system installed and tested in accordance with the requirements of UL 1479 for air leakage. The L rating of the system measured at 75 Pa in both the ambient temperature and elevated temperature tests shall not exceed:

1 1.5 cubic meters per minute per square meters of penetration opening for each through-penetration firestop system; or

2 A total cumulative leakage of 25 liters per second for any 9 m \( ^{2} \)  of wall area, or floor area.

Smoke barriers are intended to create compartments within a building that, under fire conditions, provide protection from both fire and smoke. Given that such compartments are critical in providing the necessary level of fire and smoke protection, enforceable language is deemed necessary to help ensure that the intention of the code is met. Previous language in the code included terms such as "limit," "restrict" and "resist" to indicate the degree of smoke protection required, creating inconsistent application of the provisions.

The L rating provides a quantitative indication of the through-penetration system's ability to resist the passage of smoke. Although the test is performed using air, the flow properties of air and of smoke are sufficiently close for engineering purposes as to provide a reasonable quantification of smoke leakage. The L-rating test is an optional test within the UL 1479 test standard; therefore, not all through-penetration firestop systems that are tested and listed will have this information. In the 2005 UL Fire Resistance Directory (Vol. 2), there are approximately 550 through-penetration firestop systems that are listed that also have an L rating of 5 or less. This should provide a sufficient selection to allow for code compliance in all situations.

===== Page 0599 =====
Smoke barriers, in general, have limited areas where smoke will leak through, such as at doors, dampers, penetrations and joints. Fire door assemblies and smoke dampers have previously had allowable leakage rates established by the code and referenced standards.

714.6 Nonfire-resistance-rated assemblies. Penetrations of nonfire-resistance-rated floor or floor/ceiling assemblies or the ceiling membrane of a nonfire-resistance-rated roof/ceiling assembly shall meet the requirements of Section 713 or shall comply with Section 714.6.1 or 714.6.2.

This section limits the penetrations of non-fire-resistance-rated floor assemblies to prevent the migration of smoke through a building, despite being of an unprotected type of construction. Penetrating items such as pipes are required to be in shafts or one of the permitted protection methods outlined in Sections 714.6.1 and 714.6.2.

Where penetrations of the ceiling membrane of a non-fire-resistance-rated roof/ceiling assembly occur, the penetrations are required to be protected by fireblocking in accordance with the requirements of Section 718.2.5 to restrict the spread of fire through the concealed roof space above the ceiling membrane (see commentary, Section 718.2.5).

714.6.1 Noncombustible penetrating items. Noncombustible penetrating items that connect not more than five stories are permitted, provided that the annular space is filled to resist the free passage of flame and the products of combustion with an approved noncombustible material or with a fill, void or cavity material that is tested and classified for use in through-penetration firestop systems.

Noncombustible penetrations connecting five stories or fewer (penetrating four floors or fewer) are permitted when the annular space of the penetrating item is filled with an approved noncombustible material. As required in Section 718.2.5, this material shall be tested in the form and manner intended for use to demonstrate that it will stay in place and resist the passage of flame and products of combustion. It can also be filled with a material that is tested as a through-penetration firestop system (see Commentary Figure 714.6.1).

714.6.2 Penetrating items. Penetrating items that connect not more than two stories are permitted, provided that the annular space is filled with an approved material to resist the free passage of flame and the products of combustion.

This section is not limited as to the combustibility of the penetrating item. This section allows both combustible and noncombustible penetrations of a single non-fire-resistance-rated floor (thus connecting two stories), provided the annular space is fireblocked in accordance with Section 718.2.5. This section does not require a noncombustible firestop to protect the annular space, while Section 714.6.1 does require a noncombustible firestop material.

## SECTION 715 JOINTS AND VOIDS

715.1 General. The provision of this section shall govern the materials and methods of construction used to protect joints and voids in or between horizontal and vertical assemblies.

This Section regulates joints or voids created between building assemblies, which are sometimes referred to as head-of-wall, expansion or seismic joints. These joints are most often created where the structural design of a building necessitates a separation between building components in order to accommodate anticipated structural displacements caused by thermal expansion and contraction, seismic activity, wind or other loads. Commentary Figure 715.1 illustrates some of the most common locations of these joints.

Seismic joints in multistory buildings are intended to allow differential lateral displacement of separate portions of a building during a seismic event. Expansion joints permit separate portions of the structural frame to contract and expand due to temperature change or wind sway without adversely affecting the building functions or structural integrity.

Joints can also occur in fire barriers at the intersection of the top of a wall and the underside of the floor or roof above (head of wall), within a wall or floor at any specific point to accommodate the structural design, or at the edge of the floor at the intersection of the floor and exterior wall. All of these linear openings create a "weak link" in fire-resistance-rated assemblies that can compromise the integrity of the tested assembly by allowing an avenue for the passage of fire and the products of combustion through the assembly.

715.2 Installation. Systems or materials protecting joints and voids shall be securely installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions in or on the joint or void for its entire length so as not to dislodge, loosen or otherwise impair its ability to accommodate expected building movements and to resist the passage of fire and hot gases. Fire-resistant joint systems or systems used to protect voids at exterior curtain walls and fire-resistance-rated floor intersections shall also be installed in accordance with the listing criteria.

===== Page 0600 =====
This Section requires that joint and void systems be installed for their full length or height, due to the fact that the openings to be protected by these types of joints are most often continuous. The required listing will have installation criteria. It is appropriate to install the fire-resistant joint system in accordance with the listing criteria and the manufacturer's instructions, and in a manner to accommodate building movement.

The manufacturer's installation instructions provide additional details that are not commonly identified in the listing criteria. This includes environmental conditions, tooling and additional details regarding how the fire-resistant joint system is to be installed.

For intersections at exterior curtain walls and fire-resistance-rated floors, the installation requirements for all types of protection for joints and voids need to meet the listing criteria.

715.3 Fire-resistance-rated assembly intersections. Joints installed in or between fire-resistance-rated walls, floor or floor/ceiling assemblies and roofs or roof/ceiling assemblies shall be protected by an approved fire-resistant joint system designed to resist the passage of fire for a time period not less than the required fire-resistance rating of the wall, floor or roof in or between which the system is installed.

Exception: Fire-resistant joint systems shall not be required for joints in all of the following locations:

1. Floors within a single dwelling unit.

2. Floors where the joint is protected by a shaft enclosure in accordance with Section 713.

3. Floors within atrium where the space adjacent to the atrium is included in the volume of the atrium for smoke control purposes.

4. Floors within malls.

5. Floors and ramps within parking garages or structures constructed in accordance with Sections 406.5 and 406.6.

6. Mezzanine floors.

7. Walls that are permitted to have unprotected openings.

8. Roofs where openings are permitted.

9. Control joints not exceeding a maximum width of 16 mm and tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263.

10. The intersection of exterior curtain wall assemblies and the roof slab or roof deck.

In order to maintain the efficacy of the fire-resistance-rated assembly, these openings must be protected by a fire-resistance-rated joint system with a rating equal to the assembly in the same plane. Where two assemblies intersect, the fire rating of the joint must be the same as the fire rating of the assembly (or assemblies) of the same plane as the assembly where the joint occurs. This Section is not intended to regulate joints installed in assemblies that are provided to control shrinkage cracking, such as a saw-cut control joint in concrete. This Section contains 10 locations where a fire-resistant joint system is not required to be installed to protect the joint. These generally are locations where a separation or protected opening is not required or where the joint occurs within an area that is bounded by other means of protection.

Exception 1 states that a fire-resistant joint is not required for joints contained within a single dwelling unit. This exception is similar to Section 712.1.2. Unlike Section 712.1.2, the joints can be in concealed spaces.

Exception 2 exempts fire-resistant joints completely enclosed in a shaft that complies with Section 713.

Exception 3 exempts the requirement for fire-resistant joints that are located in floors in an atrium that complies with Section 404. This exception is similar to Section 712.1.7.

Exception 4 exempts joints located in malls that comply with Section 402. Although this appears to be a general exception that would affect all floors within a covered or open mall building, it only applies to the mall. The mall is the common pedestrian area.

Exception 5 exempts joints located in open parking structures that comply with Section 406.5 and is similar to Section 712.1.9.

Exception 6 exempts joints in mezzanines that comply with Section 505 and is similar to Section 712.1.11. As a type of opening/penetration, a joint represents a similar hazard to exterior wall fire exposures as other openings.

Exception 7 acknowledges that if an exterior wall is permitted to have unprotected openings (see Table 705.8), then the joint does not require protection as well. A joint is a much smaller opening than an unprotected opening. Exception 8 exempts joints located in roof decks that are not required to have protected openings, and is similar to Section 712.1.15, which allows skylights and other penetrations in rated roof decks, provided that the structural integrity is not affected.

Exception 9 exempts control joints that have been tested as part of the overall assembly in accordance with ASTM E119 and UL 263. This allowance is in recognition of fire test data that has existed since the 1960s regarding control joints and perimeter relief joints in fire-rated systems, the performance of these devices and

===== Page 0601 =====
systems in the field and a rational approach regarding minor movement [defined here as a maximum of 16 mm] where no appreciable damage or fatigue is incurred by the joint system that would have a profound impact on the joint's fire performance. Since all buildings move slightly, it is not prudent to have to cycle and test joint systems that only move a few millimeters. Although their movement is limited, control joint systems must still pass the rigors of ASTM E119 or UL 263 in accordance with this exception.

Exception 10 clarifies that a fire-resistant joint system is not required for the joint between an exterior curtain wall and a rated, or unrated, roof slab or deck. Section 712.1.15 already exempts penetrations of roof slabs or decks from needing protection. In this case, it is specifically the joint between the roof slab or roof deck and the exterior curtain wall that would be exempted in a manner similar to through penetrations of a roof slab or roof deck.

715.3.1 Fire test criteria. Fire-resistant joint systems shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of either ASTM E 1966 or UL 2079. Nonsymmetrical wall joint systems shall be tested with both faces exposed to the furnace, and the assigned fire-resistance rating shall be the shortest duration obtained from the two tests. Where evidence is furnished to show that the wall was tested with the least fire-resistant side exposed to the furnace, subject to acceptance of the building official, the wall need not be subjected to tests from the opposite side.

Exception: For exterior walls with a horizontal fire separation distance greater than 3000 mm, the joint system shall be required to be tested for interior fire exposure only.

In order to determine the anticipated protection provided by a given assembly, the hourly fire-resistance rating must be determined by testing the joint system in accordance with UL 2079 or ASTM E1966. This standard includes specific criteria for test specimen preparation, placement, configuration, size and testing conditions of joint systems. Also included in the test protocol is the minimum positive pressure differential to be used for the test, which is intended to assist in evaluating whether the joint will remain in place during a fire condition. A joint splice must be tested, since the presence and orientation of a splice in a joint system can affect the fire performance of the joint. These splices may occur where the length of the joint to be protected exceeds the length of a prefabricated joint or where a cold joint occurs in a field-installed system. The maximum joint width must be tested when in a fully expanded or extended condition in order to evaluate the fire-resistance rating. Joints that are designed to transfer structural building loads are required to have a superimposed load during the test, which is consistent with the requirements for the testing of load-bearing fire-resistance-rated assemblies. Finally, the test addresses requirements for joints, such as expansion, seismic and wind sway joints, that are intended to accommodate building movement. Such tests include preconditioning cycling, which is intended to allow for evaluation of the joint's ability to withstand cyclical movement over its anticipated life.

Test data have indicated that the orientation of nonsymmetrical joints can have an effect on the performance of the joint. As a result, in accordance with this section, all joint systems must be tested for fire exposure from both sides so that the required protection will be provided regardless of which side of the joint is exposed to fire. The exception for joints in exterior walls correlates with Section 705.5 for the fire exposure rating of exterior walls.

Though not required by the code, an ASTM standard practice is available that can be used in cases where a standardized methodology is desired for the inspection of installed fire-resistant joint systems and perimeter fire barrier systems. Such a standardized procedure can be particularly useful in cases where a third-party inspection firm is used. ASTM E2393, Standard Practice for On-Site Inspection of Installed Fire Resistive Joint Systems and Perimeter Fire Barriers, includes items such as preconstruction meetings to review submittals, building mockups for destructive testing and scheduling onsite inspections of installed joint systems. This standard practice also identifies what actions should be taken based on the percentage of noncompliant installations identified, as well as providing a standardized reporting form.

The exception for exterior walls with an FSD of greater than 3 m brings consistency between the requirements for exterior walls and fire-resistant joint systems installed within exterior walls.

715.4 Exterior curtain wall/fire-resistance-rated floor intersections. Voids created at the intersection of exterior curtain wall assemblies and fire-resistance-rated floor, or floor/ceiling assemblies shall be protected with an approved perimeter fire containment system to prevent the interior spread of fire. Such systems shall provide an F rating for a time period not less than the fire-resistance rating of the floor or floor/ceiling assembly.

===== Page 0602 =====
The void created between a floor and a curtain wall requires sealing to prevent the spread of flames and products of combustion between adjacent stories. Most fire-rated horizontal assemblies are required to extend from outside wall to outside wall, that is from the inside faces of the exterior walls. The void in question is the one between the intersection of the edge of the fire-resistance-rated horizontal assembly and the interior face of the exterior wall or curtain wall. The void does not include the exterior wall cavity.

Tested and listed perimeter fire barrier systems do not include the interior finished wall (e.g., "knee wall") details. This makes the systems applicable to any and all finished wall configurations. The existence of the interior wall surface, even if made of fire-resistant materials such as fire-resistance-rated gypsum board, does not eliminate the need to have an appropriately tested material or system to protect the curtain wall from interior fire spread at the perimeter gap, unless that interior wall detail has been specifically tested and shown to meet the requirements of this section of the code.

Although not required by the code, an ASTM standard practice is available that can be used in cases where a standardized methodology is desired for the inspection of installed perimeter fire barrier systems. Such a standardized procedure can be particularly useful in cases where a third-party inspection firm is used. ASTM E2393, Standard Practice for On-Site Inspection of Installed Fire Resistive Joint Systems and Perimeter Fire Barriers, includes items such as preconstruction meetings to review submittals, details, variances, building mock-ups for destructive testing and scheduling a witnessed inspection of a specified percentage of installations or conducting destructive testing on a specified percentage of installations. This standard practice also identifies what actions should be taken based on the percentage of noncompliant installations identified, and provides a standardized reporting form.

715.4.1 Fire test criteria. Perimeter fire containment systems shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of ASTM E2307.

Exception: Voids created at the intersection of the exterior curtain wall assemblies and floor assemblies where the vision glass extends to the finished floor level shall be permitted to be protected with an approved material to prevent the interior spread of fire. Such material shall be securely installed and capable of preventing the passage of flame and hot gases sufficient to ignite cotton waste where subjected to ASTM E119 time-temperature fire conditions under a minimum positive pressure differential of 2.5 Pa for the time period not less than the fire-resistance rating of the floor assembly.

A fire test standard was specifically developed to evaluate the interface between a fire-resistance-rated horizontal assembly and an exterior curtain wall. This particular standard is ASTM E2307, Standard Test Method for Determining Fire Resistance of Perimeter Fire Barrier Systems Using Intermediate-Scale, Multistory Test Apparatus. The "perimeter fire barrier system" is the assembly of materials that prevents the passage of flame and hot gases at the void space between the interior surface of the wall assembly and the adjacent edge of the floor. For the purposes of the ASTM E2307 test standard, the interior face is at the interior surface of the wall's framework. The width of the joint, which has maximum allowable dimensions specified in the perimeter fire barrier system listings, is therefore the distance between the edge of the framing nearest the floor and the adjacent floor edge. The void space or cavity between framing members is not considered joint space. Commentary Figure 715.4 shows the typical components that are specified in listings of tested perimeter fire barrier systems.

The exception, which allows the option of using materials or systems that have been tested by subjecting them to an ASTM E119 or UL 263 time-temperature fire exposure under positive pressure, is the protection of the perimeter gap. These systems and materials tested in the years before the formal issuance of ASTM E2307 can continue to be used to comply with Section 715.4. Those assemblies that were tested using the ASTM E119 or UL 263 time-temperature fire exposure in a multiple-story apparatus would be expected to be in substantial compliance with ASTM E2307 and are expected to provide an equivalent level of protection.

715.5 Exterior curtain wall/ nonfire-resistance-rated floor assembly intersections. Voids created at the intersection of exterior curtain wall assemblies and nonfire-resistance-rated floor or floor/ceiling assemblies shall be filled with an approved material or system to retard the interior spread of fire and hot gases between stories.

Where the joint between walls involves a non fire-resistance-rated floor and an exterior curtain wall, there is no reason to try to maintain a fire-resistance rating with a rated joint system. However, spread of smoke is a

===== Page 0603 =====
concern and, therefore, the code calls for a tight joint to protect rapid spread of smoke from a floor of fire origin to other floors of the building. The exterior wall construction must also comply with Section 705.8.5 even though the floors are not fire-resistance rated.

715.6 Exterior curtain wall/vertical fire barrier intersections. Voids created at the intersection of nonfire-resistance-rated exterior curtain wall assemblies and vertical fire barriers shall be filled with an approved material or system to retard the interior spread of fire and hot gases.

This Section specifically addresses the intersection of nonfire-resistance-rated exterior curtain wall and rated fire barriers, providing clear performance requirements that can be applied and enforced in these conditions.

715.7 Curtain wall spandrel. Height and fire-resistance requirements for curtain wall spandrels shall comply with Section 705.8.5. Where Section 705.8.5 does not require fire-resistance-rated curtain wall spandrels, the requirements of Sections 715.4 and 715.5 shall still apply to the intersection between the curtain wall spandrels and the floor.

This provision serves as a cross reference to the vertical separation of openings in exterior wall requirements found in Section 705.8.5. This section still requires that where a floor intersects with a nonrated spandrel wall, the void space must be protected by an approved joint system.

715.8 Joints and voids in smoke barriers. Fire-resistant joint systems protecting joints in smoke barriers, and perimeter fire containment systems protecting voids at the intersection of a horizontal smoke barrier and an exterior curtain wall, shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of UL 2079 for air leakage. The L rating of the joint system shall not exceed 7.75 Liters per second per linear meter of joint at 75 Pa of water for both the ambient temperature and elevated temperature tests.

The leakage, or L rating, provides a quantitative indication of a fire-resistant joint system's ability to resist the passage of smoke. Although the test is performed using air, the flow properties of air and smoke are sufficiently close for engineering purposes as to provide a reasonable quantification of smoke leakage. The L-rating test is an optional test within the UL 2079 test standard; therefore, not all fire-resistant joint systems that are tested and listed will have this information. In the 2005 UL Fire Resistance Directory (Vol. 2), 335 fire-resistant joint systems that also have an L rating of 5 or less are listed. This should provide a sufficient selection to allow for code compliance in all situations.

## SECTION 716 OPENING PROTECTIVES

716.1 General. Opening protectives required by other sections of this code shall comply with the provisions of this section and shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 80.

This Section regulates two types of opening protectives: fire doors (Section 716.2.1) and fire protection-rated glazing (Section 716.2.1). As covered in Section 716.1.2.3, fire-resistance-rated glazing is not addressed by the balance of the requirements in Section 716. Fire doors are a type of opening protective and are installed in openings in fire-resistance-rated assemblies, including fire walls, fire barriers, fire partitions and exterior walls where the openings are required to be protected. Where a load-bearing exterior wall requires a fire-resistance rating in accordance with Table 601, it is for structural integrity purposes. The openings are not required to be protected unless required by another Section of the code, including Section 705.8. Protected openings are required to be installed in accordance with NFPA 80. NFPA 80 contains installation requirements specific to several types of protected openings as described throughout Section 716.

In addition to fire doors, another form of an opening protective is fire protection-rated glazing (commonly referred to as "fire windows"). Fire windows refer to the entire assembly, which may consist of a frame, glazing material and mounting components. A glass-block assembly is also considered a window assembly.

The fire protection ratings in this Section are based on the acceptance criteria of NFPA 252 and 257 and UL 10A, 14B or 14C. The fire protection rating acceptance criteria are not the same as that required for a fire-resistance rating for building structural elements. Fire-resistance ratings of building construction are determined by ASTM E119 or UL 263. The fire protection rating required for an opening protective is generally less than the required fire resistance of the wall (see Table 716.1(2) and Table 716.1(3)). This is based on the ability of a wall to have material or a fuel package directly against the assembly while fire doors and windows are assumed to have the fuel package remote from the surface of the assembly. Sections 716.2.1 and 716.3.4 (and subsections) reference the appropriate test standards and require that all opening protectives be labeled (see Section 716.2.9.1 for doors, Section 716.2.9.5 for glazing in doors and Section 716.3.5.2 for glazing in windows), with the exception being oversized doors, which require a certificate of inspection by an approved agency (see Section 716.2.9.2).

===== Page 0604 =====
See Table 716.1(2).
This Table lists the minimum fire protection ratings for fire doors relative to the nature and fire-resistance rating of the wall. Once the purpose and fire-resistance rating of the wall are identified, the minimum required fire protection rating of the door can be determined using the table. Typically, the minimum permitted fire door fire protection rating is less than the required fire-resistance rating of the wall.

The allowable size and required marking of glazed door vision panels are shown in the fourth and fifth columns. The last column indicates the minimum glazing marking for the sidellite and transom. The glazing markings are explained in Section 716.2.9.5 and Table 716.1(1).

In addition to the fire protection ratings in Table 716.1(2), other Sections of the code prescribe additional performance criteria for fire door assemblies. For example, Section 716.2.2.3 requires doors in exit enclosures to have a maximum temperature increase on the unexposed surface of  \( 230^{\circ} \) C after 30 minutes. Although temperature rise is not a condition of acceptance, test standards require that unexposed surface temperatures be measured and documented in the test report. Another requirement not in the Table is related to corridor doors. Required fire-rated corridor doors must also meet the requirements for smoke and draft control in Section 716.2.2.1.1. The exterior wall opening protectives in Table 716.1(2) are not required where Section 705.8 does not require protected openings.

See Table 716.1 (3).
Table 716.1 (3) prescribes the minimum fire protection ratings for fire windows, relative to the type and fire-resistance rating of the wall. Once the purpose and fire-resistance rating of the wall are identified, the minimum required fire protection rating of windows and the required marking are determined by using the table. The requirements in this Table are not to be confused with the ratings for fire doors provided in Table 716.1(2), since the requirements do differ.

For Note c, fire-protection-rated glazing is intended to stop spread of flame and smoke, but not radiant heat. The radiant heat flow through the glazing can be significant enough to cause a fire on the other side of the fire-resistance-rated separation assembly, and, specific to this issue, induce thermal runaway of the energy storage system. This Section builds on protecting the energy storage system from exposure hazards to the system by prohibiting the use of fire-protection-rated glazing in 1-hour assemblies that are used to enclose energy storage systems, except fire-resistance-rated glazing assemblies tested to ASTM E119 or UL 263, as specified in Section 716.1.2.3.

716.1.1 Alternative methods for determining fire protection ratings. The application of any of the alternative methods listed in this section shall be based on the fire exposure and acceptance criteria specified in NFPA 252, NFPA 257, UL 9, UL 10B, or UL 10C. The required fire resistance of an opening protective shall be permitted to be established by any of the following methods or procedures:

1 Designs documented in approved sources.

2 Calculations performed in an approved manner.

3 Engineering analysis based on a comparison of opening protective designs having fire protection ratings as determined by the test procedures set forth in NFPA 252, NFPA 257, UL 9, UL 10B, or UL 10C.

4 Alternative protection methods as allowed by Section 104.11.

This Section is intended to recognize approved calculations, an engineering analysis or alternative protection methods as permitted in Section 104.11 as an acceptable alternative means to determine a fire protection rating.

716.1.2 Glazing. Glazing used in fire door assemblies and fire window assemblies shall comply with this section in addition to the requirements of Sections 716.2 and 716.3, respectively.

Sections 716.2 and 716.3 contain provisions for glazing used in fire door and fire window assemblies. This charging text outlines further requirements.

716.1.2.1 Safety glazing. Fire-protection-rated glazing and fire-resistance-rated glazing installed in fire door assemblies and fire window assemblies shall comply with the safety glazing requirements of Chapter 24, where applicable.

This section provides a cross reference to the safety glazing requirements of Chapter 24, specifically Section 2406. Not only do glass or glazed panels need to be fire-resistance rated, but the glass also must pass the test requirements of CPSC 16 CFR, Part 1201 if it is installed in locations subject to human impact loads. Locations where glazing presents a hazard to occupants upon impact are identified in Section 2406.4. This requirement reduces the hazards of someone falling into a fire-resistance-rated glass panel.

716.1.2.2 Marking fire-rated glazing assemblies. Fire-rated glazing assemblies shall be marked in accordance with Table 716.1(1), Table 716.1(2) and Table 716.1(3).

===== Page 0605 =====
With two types of fire-rated glazing, it is very important to understand the labeling system and the meaning of each mark. The type of wall, the type of opening and the size of the opening determine the minimum required type of fire-rated glazing. Table 716.1(1) defines the markings, while Table 716.1(2) and Table 716.1(3) give the requirements for fire-rated glazing by type of wall and location in the wall. There are three different requirements depending on whether the glass is in a door, in a sideline or transom door frame, or in a fire window. Commentary Figure 716.1.2.2(1) And Figure 716.1.2.2(2) show the required fire-rated glazing markings by type of wall and location.

716.1.2.2.1 Fire-rated glazing identification. For fire-rated glazing, the label shall bear the identification required in Table 716.1(1) and Table 716.1(2). "D" indicates that the glazing is permitted to be used in fire door assemblies and that the glazing meets the fire protection requirements of NFPA 252, UL 10B or UL10C. "H" indicates that the glazing meets the hose stream requirements of NFPA 252, UL 10B or UL 10C. "T" indicates that the glazing meets the temperature requirements of Section 716.2.2.3.1. The placeholder "XXX" represents the fire-rating period, in minutes.

The provisions of this Section apply to fire-rated glazing used in fire door assemblies. By following the provisions of this section, the glazing utilized in fire door assemblies can be easily identified for verification of its appropriate application. The "D" designation indicates the glazing can be used in a fire door assembly, with the remaining identifiers providing specific information as to the glazing's capability to meet the hose stream test and temperature limits. See Section 716.2.5 for further discussion on the use of this glazing material. The test methods used to determine compliance are NFPA 252, UL 10B or UL 10C.

716.1.2.2.2 Fire-protection-rated glazing identification. For fire-protection-rated glazing, the label shall bear the following identification required in Table 716.1(1) and Table 716.1(3): "OH – XXX." "OH" indicates that the glazing meets both the fire protection and the hose-stream requirements of NFPA 257 or UL 9 and is permitted to be used in fire window openings. The placeholder "XXX" represents the fire-rating period, in minutes.

The provisions of this Section apply to fire-protection-rated glazing assemblies. This Section indicates that Tables 716.1(1) and 716.1(3) are the appropriate tables to be used for fire-protection-rated glazing and to provide details of the required label and standards for performance. The "OH" designation indicates the glazing meets both the fire protection and hose stream requirements for use in fire windows. See Section 716.2.5 for further discussion on the use of this glazing material.

716.1.2.2.3 Fire-resistance-rated glazing identification. For fire-resistance-rated glazing, the label shall bear the identification required in Section 703.4 and Table 716.1(1).

The provisions of this Section apply to fire-resistance-rated glazing assemblies. This Section indicates that Table 716.1(1) and Section 703.4 contain the appropriate requirements to be used for fire-resistance-rated glazing and to provide details of the required label and standards for performance. The "W" designation indicates the assembly can be utilized in a fire-resistance-rated wall assembly. The "FC" designation indicates the assembly can be utilized in a fire-resistance-rated floor ceiling assembly.

716.1.2.2.4 Fire-rated glazing that exceeds the code requirements. Fire-rated glazing assemblies marked as complying with hose stream requirements (H) shall be permitted in applications that do not require compliance with hose stream requirements. Fire-rated glazing assemblies marked as complying with temperature rise requirements (T) shall be permitted in applications that do not require compliance with temperature rise requirements. Fire-rated glazing assemblies marked with ratings (XXX) that exceed the ratings required by this code shall be permitted.

Fire-protection-rated glazing with an "H" marking has been tested and has passed the hose stream requirements of NFPA 252. Fire protection-rated glazing with a "T" marking has been tested and has passed the hose stream requirements of NFPA 252. For example, a door view panel less than 64500 mm² in area in a 2- hour exit enclosure requires only a glazing mark of [D-H-90], but a glazing panel marked with [D-H-T-90] could also be used since it exceeds the requirements for the particular location. If Table 716.1(2) requires glazing with a marking [D-H-T-60], then a panel with a marking of [D-H-T-90] could be used.

716.1.2.3 Fire-resistance-rated glazing. Fire-resistance-rated glazing tested as part of a fire-resistance-rated wall or floor/ceiling assembly in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 and labeled in accordance with Section 703.4 shall not otherwise be required to comply with this section where used as part of a wall or floor/ceiling assembly.

===== Page 0606 =====
There are glazing materials used as and tested as a wall assembly under ASTM E119 or UL 263 that are not covered by Section 716. Because these materials can meet the same fire-resistance requirements of the wall, they are not required to be regulated as an opening that would require the lower level of protection that fire protection-rated glazing provides (see commentary, Section 703.4).

716.1.2.3.1 Glazing in fire door and fire window assemblies. Fire-resistance-rated glazing shall be permitted in fire door and fire window assemblies where tested and installed in accordance with their listings and where in compliance with the requirements of this section.

This Section indicates that where fire-resistant-rated glazing is used as part of a fire door or fire window assembly, there are provisions in Section 716 that apply to its use.

716.2 Fire door assemblies. Fire door assemblies required by other sections of this code shall comply with the provisions of this section. Fire door frames with transom lights, sidelights or both shall be permitted in accordance with Section 716.2.5.4.

This Section requires fire door assemblies to comply with the applicable portions of Section 716. Further, this Section requires fire door frames with transom lights, sidelights or both, where used, to comply with Section 716.2.5.4.

716.2.1 Testing requirements. Approved fire door and fire shutter assemblies shall be constructed of any material or assembly of component materials that conforms to the test requirements of Sections 716.2.1.1 through 716.2.1.4 and the fire protection rating indicated in Table 716.1(2).

Exceptions:

1. Labeled protective assemblies that conform to the requirements of this section or UL 10A, UL 14B and UL 14C for tin-clad fire door assemblies.

2. Floor fire door assemblies in accordance with Section 712.1.13.1.

Where the code refers to a fire door assembly, the intent is that the term "fire door" (see the definition in Section 202) applies to the door itself, while the term "fire door assembly" includes the fire door, the frame, related hardware and accessories, unless otherwise noted (see the definition of "Fire door assembly" in Section 202). Therefore, it is important to realize that a fire door by itself is not generally accepted. An assembly that includes the door is needed. A door by itself cannot provide the protection. It needs to be supported by the hinges, held into a specific frame and generally have latching and closing hardware. By requiring an assembly tested to the specific standards, all of the components needed for protection will be provided. For example, although there is not a direct mention in the Section relative to mandating latching hardware, the referenced installation standard, NFPA 80, addresses the requirements relative to positive latch devices.

Labels that indicate compliance with UL 10A, 14B or 14C are acceptable (see Exception 1). Exception 2 exempts floor fire door assemblies from the requirements of this section, since Section 712.1.13.1 requires floor fire doors to comply with a different test standard (NFPA 288) and their rating must not be less than the rating of the horizontal assembly being penetrated (see the commentary to Section 712.1.13.1 for a discussion of floor fire doors).

716.2.1.1 Side-hinged or pivoted swinging doors. Fire door assemblies with side-hinged and pivoted swinging doors shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 252 or UL 10C. For tests conducted in accordance with NFPA 252, the fire test shall be conducted using the positive pressure method specified in the standard.

Fire door assemblies that contain side-hinged or pivoted swinging doors are to be tested in accordance with the referenced test standards. This provision is intended to ensure better approximation of the conditions found in an actual building fire where smoke, heat and hot gasses rise to the top of the room and increase the pressure in the upper portion of the room. Test method UL 10C contains the requirements for positive pressure testing. NFPA 252 describes two fire test procedures, a positive pressure test and a "test conducted at other than positive pressure" (a neutral pressure test). This section requires use of the positive pressure method described in the standard.

716.2.1.2 Other types of assemblies. Fire door assemblies with other types of doors, including swinging elevator doors, horizontal sliding fire doors, rolling steel fire doors, fire shutters, bottom-and side-hinged chute intake doors, and top-hinged chute discharge doors, shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 252 or UL 10B. For tests conducted in accordance with NFPA 252, the neutral pressure plane in the furnace shall be maintained as nearly equal to the atmospheric pressure as possible at the top of the door, as specified in the standard.

This section references NFPA 252 and UL10B for fire door assemblies containing other than the typical side hinged-type doors. NFPA 252 is a general test standard that is not specific to any type of door. UL 10B was developed for negative pressure testing of fire door and fire

===== Page 0607 =====
shutter assemblies and is viewed as a viable test method, provided that the pressure is maintained at or nearly at atmospheric pressure. NFPA 252 describes two fire test procedures, a positive pressure test and a "test conducted at other than positive pressure" (a neutral pressure test). This Section requires use of a neutral pressure test method described in the standard. It is important to distinguish that the pressure testing required for side-hinged or pivoted swinging doors by Section 716.2.1.1 is not applicable to this section and other door types.

716.2.1.3 Glazing in transoms lights and sidelights in corridors and smoke barriers. Glazing material in any other part of the door assembly, including transom lights and sidelights, shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 257 or UL 9, including the hose stream test, in accordance with Section 716.3.1.1.

Sidelights and transoms, which are not part of the fire door but instead are part of the fire door assembly (see definitions in Section 202), are required to be tested in accordance with, and pass the hose stream test within, NFPA 257 or UL 9.

716.2.1.4 Smoke and draft control. Fire door assemblies that serve as smoke and draft control assemblies shall be tested in accordance with UL 1784.

Fire door assemblies may also be required to serve as smoke and draft control assemblies. Where this is the case, testing in accordance with UL 1784 is required. UL 1784 testing determines air leakage through door assemblies and other opening protectives within walls where air leakage is required to be controlled.

716.2.2 Performance requirements. Fire door assemblies shall be installed in the assemblies specified in Table 716.1(2) and shall comply with the fire protection rating specified.

This section points to Table 716.1(2) for minimum requirements related to fire door assemblies based on the type of assembly they are intended to be installed into. See the commentary to Table 716.1(2) for more information.

716.2.2.1 Door assemblies in corridors and smoke barriers. Fire door assemblies required to have a minimum fire protection rating of 20 minutes where located in corridor walls or smoke barrier walls having a fire-resistance rating in accordance with Table 716.1(2) shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 252 or UL 10C without the hose stream test.

Exceptions:

1. Viewports that require a hole not larger than 25 mm in diameter through the door, have not less than a 6 mm glass disc and the holder is of metal that will not melt out where subject to temperatures of  \( 927^{\circ} \) C.

2. Corridor door assemblies in occupancies of Group I-2 shall be in accordance with Section 407.3.1.

3. Unprotected openings shall be permitted for corridors in multitheater complexes where each motion picture auditorium has not fewer than one-half of its required exit or exit access doorways opening directly to the exterior or into an exit passageway.

4. Horizontal sliding doors in smoke barriers that comply with Sections 408.6 and 408.8.4 in occupancies in Group I-3.

This section covers doors in fire partitions specifically for corridors and doors in smoke barriers. NFPA 252 and UL 10C standards require a hose stream test on all fire door assemblies. The hose stream test is intended to provide a measurement of structural integrity by evaluating the ability of the assembly to withstand impact. It has come to be accepted that a hose stream is not justified for 20-minute doors.

Exception 1 accepts certain viewports that are not required to be tested as a part of a door assembly. The use of viewports is fairly common in corridors of a Group R-1 occupancy or other similar locations. Because of the limited size and materials, the overall performance of the door will not be greatly affected by including the viewport.

Exception 2 serves as a cross reference to the requirements for a Group I-2 occupancy, which does not require the door to have a fire protection rating.

Exception 3 has little application now due to the requirements of Sections 1020.2 of SBC 201 and 903.2.1.1. Item. This exception was originally intended to allow the removal of latching hardware on the corridor door and, therefore, reduce the level of noise that was made when it was opened during a movie. Since the code now requires all multithreaded complexes to be sprinkled and corridors in sprinkled Group A occupancies do not require a fire-resistive rating, the other provisions of the code would eliminate the need for the door to have a fire-protection rating and the latch that was considered as the problem is then generally not required.

Exception 4 serves as a cross reference to Section 408 for Group I-3 occupancies that contain requirements specific to smoke-tight

===== Page 0608 =====
door assemblies for specific locations within resident housing areas.

716.2.2.1.1 Smoke and draft control. The air leakage rate of the door assembly shall not exceed 15 liters per second per square meters of door opening at 25 Pa of water for both the ambient temperature and elevated temperature tests. Louvers shall be prohibited. Terminated stops shall be prohibited on doors required by Section 405.4.3 to comply with Section 716.2.2.1 and prohibited on doors required by Item 3 of Section 3006.3, or Section 3007.6.3 or 3008.6.3 to comply with this section.

This Section is only applicable to fire doors in corridors or smoke barrier walls. Where a corridor wall is required to be fire protection rated, a degree of smoke control is needed to provide a tenable space for egress. Fire doors in corridors and smoke barriers are required to meet the criteria of UL 1784 as discussed in Section 716.2.1.4. This standard measures the movement of smoke through a door assembly. The criteria for air leakage are provided in this section. The door assemblies required to meet the testing requirements of UL1784 when tested without an artificial bottom seal, as required in Sections 405.4.3, 3006.3 (3), 3007.6.3 and 3008.6.3, are prohibited from using door frames with terminated stops.

716.2.2.2 Door assemblies in other fire partitions. Fire door assemblies required to have a minimum fire protection rating of 20 minutes where located in other fire partitions having a fire-resistance rating of 0.5 hour in accordance with Table 716.1(2) shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 252, UL 10B or UL 10C with the hose stream test.

Section 708.1 lists the locations requiring fire partitions. Fire partitions, other than corridor walls, would be dwelling unit separation walls, sleeping unit separation walls, tenant space walls in malls and elevator lobby separation walls. Unlike the corridor doors in Section 716.2.2.1, these doors must be tested with the hose stream.

716.2.2.3 Doors in interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways. Fire door assemblies in interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways shall have a maximum transmitted temperature rise of not more than  \( 250^{\circ} \) C above ambient at the end of 30 minutes of standard fire test exposure.

Exception: The maximum transmitted temperature rise is not required in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.
This section requires that door assemblies utilized in interior exit stairways, ramp enclosures and exit passageways comply with the requirements of Section 715 and be tested in accordance with either NFPA 252 or UL 10C.

This section requires that door assemblies utilized in interior exit stairways, ramp enclosures and exit passageways comply with the requirements of Section 715 and be tested in accordance with either NFPA 252 or UL 10C. This section adds a requirement that door construction is limited to a temperature rise of  \( 232^{\circ} \) C on the unexposed side during the first 30 minutes of the standard fire test (NFPA 252). The labels for these doors are required to indicate that the temperature on the unexposed side is  \( 232^{\circ} \) C or less above ambient temperature. The temperature rise rating is not required on doors in sprinklered buildings.

It should be noted that the temperature rise criterion is not otherwise a limitation with respect to a door receiving a fire protection rating. Therefore, simply specifying a  \( \frac{1}{3} \) hour fire protection rating on the door does not ensure the additional requirements of Section 716.1.1 are met. The basis for limiting the temperature rise of the unexposed surface of exit doors to  \( 232^{\circ} \) C is that a higher allowable temperature would provide enough radiant heat to discourage or even prevent building occupants from closely approaching or passing by the door assembly during a fire emergency. The intent is to protect the occupants in the vertical exit enclosure and exit passageway from excessive radiant heat. The exception provides relief from providing doors meeting temperature rise ratings when buildings are equipped throughout with either an NFPA 13 or 13R automatic sprinkler system.

716.2.2.3.1 Glazing in doors. Fire-protection-rated glazing in excess of 0.065 m² is not permitted. Fire-resistance-rated glazing in excess of 0.065 m² shall be permitted in door fire doors. Listed fire-resistance-rated glazing in a fire door shall have a maximum transmitted temperature rise in accordance with Section 716.2.2.3 when the fire door is tested in accordance with NFPA 252, UL 10B or UL 10C.

This section only addresses glazing in doors in stair-way enclosures and exit passage enclosures. Glazing 0.065 m² or less may be fire-protection-rated glazing. Glazing over 0.065 m² must be fire-resistance-rated glazing. The larger glazing panels in fire doors shall have a temperature rise rating of 232°C. This increased glazing is to be tested as a component of the door.

The test methods to be utilized are listed in Section 716.2.1 and include NFPA 252, UL 10B and UL10C. The 0.065 m² threshold is consistent with the glazing size limitations contained in Section 716.2.5.1.2.1. In general,

===== Page 0609 =====
the glazing is required to be tested first, and, if it meets the ASTM E119 acceptance criteria, it is listed as a fire-resistance-rated glazing. That "listed fire-resistance-rated glazing" is then installed in a fire door and tested in accordance with NFPA 252, including tests for the maximum transmitted temperature rise requirements of Section 716.2.2.3.

716.2.3 Fire doors. Fire doors installed within a fire door assembly shall meet the fire rating indicated in Table 716.1(2).

Fire doors that are part of a fire door assembly must meet the fire rating required by Table 716.1(2) based on the type of wall assembly intended to be installed. See the commentary to Table 716.1(2) for more information.

716.2.4 Fire door frames. Fire door frames installed as part of a fire door assembly shall meet the fire rating indicated in Table 716.1(2).

Fire door frames that are part of a fire door assembly must meet the fire rating required by Table 716.1(2) based on the type of wall assembly intended to be installed. See the commentary to Table 716.1(2) for more information.

716.2.5 Glazing in fire door assemblies. Fire-rated glazing conforming to the opening protection requirements in Section 716.2.1 shall be permitted in fire door assemblies.

his section of the code addresses fire-rated glazing and fire protection-rated glazing material in door assemblies installed in fire walls and fire barriers. It applies to glazing in doors, sidelights and transoms, but not to glazing in fire windows, which is covered in Section 716.3.4. Wired glass is no longer specifically mentioned and, if used, must meet the same test standards as other glazing material [see Table 716.1(1)].

716.2.5.1 Size limitations. Fire-resistance-rated glazing shall comply with the size limitations in Section 716.2.5.1.1 Fire-protection-rated glazing shall comply with the size limitations of NFPA 80, and as provided in Section 716.2.5.1.2.

Fire-resistance-rated glazing is allowed in more applications than fire-protection-rated glazing. Therefore, the more stringent fire testing methods of Section 716.2.5.1.1 are required. NFPA 80 permits fire-protection-rated glazing in fire doors with a fire protection rating up to 3 hours. For 1/3-, 1/2-, 3/4-, 1- and 11/2-hour doors, the allowable area is a function of the glazed area tested. One- hour and 11/2-hour doors requiring a temperature rise rating are limited to 0.065 m² or less. While NFPA 80 allows a view panel 0.0065 m² or less in 3-hour fire doors, Table 716.1(2) does not. The design must meet both NFPA 90 and Table 716.1(2).
716.2.5.1.1 Fire-resistance-rated glazing in door assemblies in fire walls and fire barriers rated greater than 1 hour. Fire-resistance-rated glazing tested to ASTM E 119 or UL 263 and NFPA 252, UL 10B or UL 10C shall be permitted in fire door assemblies located in fire walls and in fire barriers in accordance with Table 716.1(2) to the maximum size tested and in accordance with their listings.

Fire-resistance-rated glazing, not fire protection glazing, shall be permitted in fire walls and fire barrier walls to the maximum size tested and as allowed in Table 716.1(2). The glazing, if used in a fire door view panel, must be tested to two standards both ASTM E119 or UL 263 and NFPA 252 or UL 10.

716.2.5.1.2 Fire-protection-rated glazing in door assemblies in fire walls and fire barriers rated greater than 1 hour. Fire-protection-rated glazing shall be prohibited in fire walls and fire barriers except as provided in Sections 716.2.5.1.2.1 and 716.2.5.1.2.2.

Fire-protection-rated glazing, not fire-resistance-rated glazing, shall not be allowed in fire walls or fire barriers greater than 1 hour except for 0.065 m² or less view panels in fire doors in horizontal exits and fire barrier walls. This view panel allowance recognizes the benefit of visual observance in an emergency situation.

716.2.5.1.2.1 Horizontal exits. Fire-protection-rated glazing shall be permitted as vision panels in self-closing swinging fire door assemblies serving as horizontal exits in fire walls where limited to 0.065 m².

Only self-closing swinging fire doors in horizontal exits are allowed to have the limited area view panel of fire-protection-rated glazing discussed in the commentary to Section 716.2.5.1.2. Other door types are not allowed these view panels.

716.2.5.1.2.2 Fire barriers. Fire-protection-rated glazing shall be permitted in fire doors having a 1½-hour fire protection rating intended for installation in fire barriers, where limited to 0.065 m².

Only fire barrier doors required to be 11/2-hour fire rated are allowed to have the limited area view panel of fire-protection-rated glazing discussed in the commentary to Section 716.2.5.1.2. Some fire barriers are required to be 3- and 4-hour rated, so doors with the 3-hour fire rating would not be allowed the view panels.

716.2.5.2 Elevator, stairway and ramp protectives. Approved fire-protection-rated glazing used in fire door assemblies in elevator,

===== Page 0610 =====
stairway and ramp enclosures shall be so located as to furnish clear vision of the passageway or approach to the elevator, stairway or ramp.

The purpose of vision panels in exit doors and elevator doors is to permit observation by occupants who may be on the opposite side of the door before opening it. The limitations on the size of panels in Section 716.2.5.1 still apply.

716.2.5.3 Glazing in door assemblies in corridors and smoke barriers. In a 20-minute fire door assembly, the glazing material in the door itself shall have a minimum fire-protection-rated glazing of 20 minutes and shall be exempt from the hose stream test.

Glazing in 20-minute-rated doors must also have a 20-minute fire protection rating and is not required to pass the hose stream test. Sidelights and transoms, which are not part of the fire door but instead are part of the fire door assembly (see definitions in Section 202), are required to pass the hose stream test as detailed in NFPA 257 or UL 9 as discussed in the commentary to Section 716.2.1.3.

716.2.5.4 Fire door frames with transom lights and sidelights. Fire-protection-rated glazing shall be permitted in door frames with transom lights, sidelights or both, where a 3/4-hour fire protection rating or less required and in 2-hour fire-resistance-rated exterior walls in accordance with Table 716.1(2). Fire door frames with transom lights, sidelights, or both, installed with fire-resistance-rated glazing tested as an assembly in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 shall be permitted where a fire protection rating exceeding  \( \frac{3}{4} \)  hour is required in accordance with Table 716.1(2).

The purpose of this section is to address the use of fire-resistance-rated glazing in fire door frames with transoms or sidelights where the fire protection rating exceeds 3/4 hour. For instances where the required rating is 3/4 hour or less, fire-protection-rated glazing meeting the test requirements of NFPA 252 shall be permitted. Fire-resistance-rated glazing is required where the required rating exceeds 3/4 hour. The assembly must be tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263. Testing the assemblies to these criteria exposes the glazing to the appropriate temperature rise to substantiate the higher fire protection rating.

716.2.5.4.1 Energy storage system separation. Fire-protection-rated glazing shall not be permitted in fire door frames with transom lights and sidelights in fire barriers required by Section 1207 of SBC 801 to enclose energy storage systems.

Battery storage systems, now referred to as Energy Storage Systems, have historically been separated from other portions of an occupancy by 1- or 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction as an incidental use. The enclosure protects the general occupancy areas from an event involving the incidental use. One of the hazards of an energy storage system is thermal runaway leading to a fire event. These fire events can be significant and last several hours. The systems are required to be designed to prevent thermal runaway internally; however, thermal runaway can be induced in some cases by an exterior event such as a damaging impact or fire exposure. Though the code now requires fire suppression of the space occupied by the energy storage system, the remainder of the occupancy may not be protected, and the current code language allows the use of fire-protection-rated glazing in material in door and window openings. Fire-protection-rated glazing is intended to stop spread of flame and smoke, but not radiant heat. The radiant heat flow through the glazing can be significant enough to cause a fire on the other side of the fire-resistance-rated separation assembly, and, specific to this issue, induce thermal runaway of the energy storage system. This Section builds on protecting the energy storage system from exposure hazards to the system by prohibiting the use of fire-protection-rated glazing in 1-hour assemblies that are used to enclose energy storage systems.

716.2.6 Fire door hardware and closures. Fire door hardware and closures shall be installed on fire door assemblies in accordance with the requirements of this section.

This section requires installation of fire door hardware and closures on fire doors. See the commentaries to Sections 716.2.6.1 through 716.2.6.7.

716.2.6.1 Door closing. Fire doors shall be latching and self- or automatic closing in accordance with this section.

Exceptions:

1. Fire doors located in common walls separating sleeping units in Group R-1 shall be permitted without automatic- or self-closing devices.

2. The elevator car doors and the associated hoistway enclosure doors at the floor level designated for recall in accordance with Section 3003.2 shall be permitted to remain open during Phase I emergency recall operation.

===== Page 0611 =====
In order for fire doors to be effective, they must be in the closed position. Therefore, the preferred arrangement is to install self-closing doors. Recognizing that operational practices often require doors to be open for an extended period of time, automatic-closing doors are permitted as long as this opening will not pose a threat to occupant safety and the doors will self-latch. Automatic-closing devices enable the opening to be protected during a fire condition. The basic requirement for closing devices and specific requirements for automatic-closing and self-closing devices are given in NFPA 80 (see Section 716.1). The requirements for latching provide added confidence that the door will remain closed by being latched.

Exception 1 discusses doors in the separation walls of side-by-side sleeping units in Group R-1 occupancies. This allows two or more sleeping units to be opened to each other so that a suite can be established if desired. If the adjacent rooms are rented by separate people, the doors will generally be closed. If the rooms are rented together, this permits a larger room to be created simply by opening the door. Because most rooms only open to one adjacent room, most configurations would still result in a solid fire partition without any door openings between this suite of rooms and any other sleeping units.

Exception 2 coordinates with the requirements related to elevator recall that are found in Chapter 30. Since the hoistway doors generally provide the shaft opening protection, this exception is needed for this situation.

716.2.6.2 Latch required. Unless otherwise specifically permitted, single side-hinged swinging fire doors and both leaves of pairs of side-hinged swinging fire doors shall be provided with an active latch bolt that will secure the door when it is closed.

This section merely reinforces the acceptance criteria of fire test standards for fire doors. A door that does not latch would generally be an ineffective barrier against the spread of a fire and would be unable to withstand the pressures of a fire in the adjacent space. Such hardware must be listed for use on fire doors.

716.2.6.3 Chute intake door latching. Chute intake doors shall be positive latching, remaining latched and closed in the event of latch spring failure during a fire emergency.

Latching devices for chute intake doors must provide a positive latch and, in the event of a latch spring failure, shall remain closed. The proponent of this code change stated that simple technology exists that can accomplish this fail-safe provision.
716.2.6.4 Automatic-closing fire door assemblies. Automatic-closing fire door assemblies shall be self-closing in accordance with NFPA 80.

NFPA 80 requires doors to be automatic closing with a closing device and a separate hold-release device or hold-open mechanism that closes upon activation of an automatic fire detector acceptable to the building official. This provision simply ensures that when the door is released it will move to the closed position.

716.2.6.5 Delayed-action closers. Doors required to be self-closing and not required to be automatic closing shall be permitted to be equipped with delayed-action closers.

This section allows self-closing fire doors to be equipped with delayed action closers. Unlike automatic-closing doors, which are commonly held in an open position, self-closing doors that are not automatic-closing doors are normally in a closed position unless being used. Thus, in a fire situation, the doors within the scope of this proposal would be closed except when being used and during the relatively brief delay caused by the delayed action closer. Delayed action closers are frequently used in schools to allow a teacher to lead a group of students from one area of the building to another. A door with a delayed action closer allows the teacher with a group of students to pass through the door before it closes, helping to keep the group intact.

716.2.6.6 Smoke-activated doors. Automatic-closing doors installed in the following locations shall be permitted to have hold-open devices. Doors shall automatically close by the actuation of smoke detectors installed in accordance with Section 907.3 or by loss of power to the smoke detector or hold-open device. Doors that are automatic-closing by smoke detection shall not have more than a 10-second delay before the door starts to close after the smoke detector is actuated. Automatic-closing doors that protect openings installed in the following locations shall comply with this section:

1 In walls that separate incidental uses in accordance with Section 509.4.

2 In a fire wall in accordance with Section 706.8.

3 In fire barriers in accordance with Section 707.6.

4 In fire partitions in accordance with Section 708.6.

5 In smoke barriers in accordance with Section 709.5.

6 In smoke partitions in accordance with section 710.5.2.3.

===== Page 0612 =====
7 In shaft enclosures in accordance with Section 713.7.

8 In waste and linen chutes, discharge openings and access and discharge rooms in accordance with Section 713.13. Loading doors installed in waste and linen chutes shall meet the requirements of Sections 716.2.6.1 and 716.2.6.3.

Since the integrity of the means of egress or general occupant safety can be compromised by smoke, doors at certain locations are required to be automatic closing upon the detection of smoke. The automatic closer is also to activate upon loss of power to the smoke detector and to the hold-open device. NFPA 72, as referenced in Chapter 9, contains criteria relative to the number and location of detectors necessary for door release service. NFPA 80 also provides criteria for closing devices required for a fire door.

716.2.6.7 Doors in pedestrian ways. Vertical sliding or vertical rolling steel fire doors in openings through which pedestrians travel shall be heat activated or activated by smoke detectors with alarm verification.

Where vertical sliding or rolling doors are provided as an opening protective through which pedestrian travel is intended, automatic-closing actuation is not permitted via a smoke detector unless alarm verification is provided. Sudden closing of these doors and the potential of false actuation of smoke detectors create a hazard to occupants moving through the opening.

716.2.7 Swinging fire shutters. Where fire shutters of the swinging type are installed in exterior openings, not less than one row in every three vertical rows shall be arranged to be readily opened from the outside and shall be identified by distinguishing marks or letters not less than 150 mm high.

The fire department needs access to openings for ventilation purposes and entry. Therefore, if an extensive amount of swinging shutters is used, at least one in every three vertical rows must be readily open able from the outside. The operable shutter must also be easily recognized for use by the fire department. The identification is on the exterior.

716.2.8 Rolling fire shutters. Where fire shutters of the rolling type are installed, such shutters shall include approved automatic-closing devices.

Rolling fire shutters require a detecting device to initiate the closing sequence. The actuation shall be by smoke detectors in locations required by Section 716.2.6.6.

716.2.9 Labeled protective assemblies. Fire door assemblies shall be labeled by an approved agency. The labels shall comply with NFPA 80 and shall be permanently affixed to the door or frame.

A label indicates that the door assembly has not only passed the required fire test but that a follow-up inspection was also performed during production (see Section 1703.5.2). The building official should, therefore, verify that fire door assemblies are properly labeled, and not rely solely on a test report. To provide specific guidance, compliance with NFPA 80 is required.

716.2.9.1 Fire door labeling requirements. Fire doors shall be labeled showing the name of the manufacturer or other identification readily traceable back to the manufacturer, the name or trademark of the third-party inspection agency, the fire protection rating and, where required for fire doors in interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways by Section 716.2.2.3, the maximum transmitted temperature end point. Smoke and draft control doors complying with UL 1784 shall be labeled as such and shall comply with Section 716.2.9.3. Labels shall be approved and permanently affixed. The label shall be applied at the factory or location where fabrication and assembly are performed.

Labels on fire doors apply to the door only. The building official should verify that the remaining portions of the assembly (door frame, hardware and accessories) are also labeled for use with a labeled fire door. In addition to the appropriate fire protection rating, the labels for interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageway doors are required to indicate the temperature rise on the unexposed surface after 30 minutes (see commentary, Section 716.2.2.3). A label is also to serve as evidence of both a required fire protection rating and third-party inspection not solely as a manufacturer's identification (see Section 1703.5). To ensure appropriate labeling, it is required to occur at the actual location where fabrication and assembly occur.

716.2.9.1.1 Light kits, louver and components. Listed light kits and louver and their required preparations shall be considered as part of the labeled door where such installations are done under the listing program of the third-party agency. Fire doors and door assemblies shall be permitted to consist of components, including glazing, vision light kits and hardware that are listed or classified and labeled for such use by different third-party agencies.

The code allows the use of listed light kits, listed louver and their required preparation material to be considered as part of a labeled door where such light kits and louver are

===== Page 0613 =====
installed under the conditions of their listing. Where such components are listed for use in such doors, they may be listed, or classified, and labeled by different third-party agencies. Louvers would be required to be listed with shutters and could not be used where prohibited elsewhere in the code.

716.2.9.2 Oversized doors. Oversized fire doors shall bear an oversized fire door label by an approved agency or shall be provided with a certificate of inspection furnished by an approved testing agency. Where a certificate of inspection is furnished by an approved testing agency, the certificate shall state that the door conforms to the requirements of design, materials and construction, but has not been subjected to the fire test.

* Recognizing that doors may exceed the required tested size, the code indicates that oversized doors that have a certificate of inspection from an approved testing agency are acceptable. For example, rolling steel-type fire doors are normally listed for 11 m² with no dimension in excess of 3600 mm. Rolling steel-type doors that exceed these dimensions are permitted as long as they have certification indicating that they are constructed of materials of the same grade, thickness, shape, etc., as labeled doors. This is normally indicated with a certificate that reads “Oversized Fire Door Certificate.”

The code does not specify what is considered as an “oversized door.” This information would be dependent on the test standard and the dimensions listed within it. Note that the provisions of Sections 706.8 and 707.6 allow openings up to 15 m² in area.

716.2.9.3 Smoke and draft control door labeling requirements. Smoke and draft control doors complying with UL 1784 shall be labeled in accordance with Section 716.2.9.1 and shall show the letter “S” on the fire-rating label of the door. This marking shall indicate that the door and frame assembly are in compliance where listed or labeled gasketing is installed.

When doors are required to be approved for smoke and draft control, they require a special label containing the letter "S." Without this label it is very difficult to assess in the field that the door meets UL 1784 and that listed or labeled casketing is also required to be installed with the door and frame.

716.2.9.4 Fire door frame labeling requirements. Fire door frames shall be labeled showing the names of the manufacturer and the third-party inspection agency.

It is required that the fire door frame be labeled with names of the manufacturer and the third-party testing agency to assist in the assessment of the door in the field. The actual rating is not required to be included.
716.2.9.5 Labeling. Fire-rated glazing shall bear a label or other identification showing the name of the manufacturer, the test standard and information required in Table 716.1(1) that shall be issued by an approved agency and shall be permanently identified on the glazing.

This provision of the code maintains proper labeling for each piece of fire protection-rated glazing. The label must specify the name or fully identifying logo of the manufacturer, the test standard that was used to evaluate the glass and the rating established by the test.

716.2.9.6 Fire door operator labeling requirements. Fire door operators for horizontal sliding doors shall be labeled and listed for use with the assembly.

Section 716.1 requires fire door assemblies to be installed in accordance with NFPA 80. NFPA 80 requires fire door operators to be listed for use with the door. Therefore, the requirements of this section related to operators of horizontal sliding fire doors are consistent with the requirements in NFPA 80.

716.2.10 Installation of door assemblies in corridors and smoke barriers. Installation of smoke doors shall be in accordance with NFPA 105.

This section requires the installation of smoke doors to comply with NFPA 105. NFPA 105 contains requirements such as self or automatic closing, sealing of the bottom edge of the door and allowances for the release of smoke doors.

716.3 Fire window assemblies. Fire window assemblies required by other sections of this code shall comply with the provisions of this section.

This section requires fire window assemblies to comply with Sections 716.3.1 through 716.3.4. See the commentaries to those respective sections.

716.3.1 Testing requirements. Fire window assemblies shall be constructed of any material or assembly of component materials that conforms to the test requirements of Sections 716.3.1.1 and 716.3.1.2 and the fire protection rating indicated in Table 716.1 (3).

This section requires fire window assemblies to be tested to determine the fire protection rating. Once the fire protection rating is determined by these tests, see Table 716.1 (3) to determine the allowable wall assemblies in which the fire window assemblies can be installed.

716.3.1.1 Testing under positive pressure. NFPA 257 or UL 9 shall evaluate fire-protection-rated glazing under positive pressure. Within the

===== Page 0614 =====
first 10 minutes of a test, the pressure in the furnace shall be adjusted so not less than two-thirds of the test specimen is above the neutral pressure plane, and the neutral pressure plane shall be maintained at that height for the balance of the test.

Under fire conditions there is likely to be positive pressure acting on the window. Therefore, this Section requires that tested window assemblies be subjected to positive pressure conditions during the test.

716.3.1.2 Nonsymmetrical glazing systems. Nonsymmetrical fire-protection-rated glazing systems in fire partitions, fire barriers or in exterior walls with a fire separation distance of 3000 mm or less pursuant to Section 705 shall be tested with both faces exposed to the furnace, and the assigned fire protection rating shall be the shortest duration obtained from the two tests conducted in compliance with NFPA 257 or UL 9.

This section requires that glazing systems that by design are not the same on either side be tested on both sides. The rating resulting from these tests will be determined from the lower performing side. These requirements are for fire-type barriers (versus smoke) within buildings and when used on an exterior wall with a small separation distance less than 3 mm. The concern here is the same as for nonsymmetrical wall assemblies in Section 703.2.1.1.

716.3.2 Performance requirements. Fire window assemblies shall be installed in the assemblies and comply with the fire protection rating specified in Table 716.1 (3).

This section points to Table 716.1 (3) for minimum requirements related to fire window assemblies based on the type of assembly they are intended to be installed into. See the commentary to Table 716.1 (3) for more information.

716.3.2.1 Interior fire window assemblies. Fire-protection-rated glazing used in fire window assemblies located in fire partitions and fire barriers shall be limited to use in assemblies with a maximum fire-resistance rating of 1 hour in accordance with this section.

Since fire-protection-rated glazing has a maximum 3/4-hour fire-resistance rating, fire windows using fire-protection-rated glazing may only be used in fire-partitions (1-hour rated in accordance with Section 708.3) and fire barriers having a fire-resistance rating of 1 hour. These limitations are indicated in Table 716.1 (3).

716.3.2.1.1 Where  \( \frac{3}{4} \) -hour fire protection window assemblies permitted. Fire-protection-rated glazing requiring 45-minute opening protection in accordance with Table 716.1 (3) shall be limited to fire partitions designed in accordance with Section 708 and fire barriers utilized in the applications set forth in Sections 707.3.6, 707.3.7 and 707.3.9 where the fire-resistance rating does not exceed 1 hour. Fire-resistance-rated glazing assemblies tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 shall not be subject to the limitations of this section.

Not all 1-hour fire-resistance-rated walls are allowed to have fire windows with fire-protection-rated glazing. All fire partitions and certain fire barrier walls may have fire protection-rated glazing. Only 1-hour fire-resistance-rated fire barriers in incidental use separations (Section 707.3.7) and mixed occupancy separations (Section 707.3.9) may have fire protection-rated glazing in fire windows. Shaft walls, exit access stair-way enclosures, interior exit stairways, exit passageway enclosures and control area separation walls are considered fire barrier walls, though when rated for 1 hour, are not allowed to have fire windows with fire-protection-rated glazing. Of course, nothing in this section prohibits fire-resistance-rated glazing in fire windows in some of those applications.

716.3.2.1.1.1 Energy storage system separation. Fire-protection-rated glazing is not permitted for use in fire window assemblies in fire barriers required by Section 1207 of SBC 801 to enclose energy storage systems.

Battery storage systems, now referred to as Energy Storage Systems, have historically been separated from other portions of an occupancy by 1- or 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction as an incidental use. The enclosure protects the general occupancy areas from an event involving the incidental use. One of the hazards of an energy storage system is thermal runaway leading to a fire event. These fire events can be significant and last several hours. The systems are required to be designed to prevent thermal runaway internally; however, thermal runaway can be induced in some cases by an exterior event such as a damaging impact or fire exposure. Though the code now requires fire suppression of the space occupied by the energy storage system, the remainder of the occupancy may not be protected, and the current code language allows the use of fire-protection-rated glazing material in door and window openings. Fire-protection-rated glazing is intended to stop spread of flame and smoke, but not radiant heat. The radiant heat flow through the glazing can be significant enough to cause a fire on the other side of the fire-resistance-rated

===== Page 0615 =====
separation assembly, and, specific to this issue, induce thermal runaway of the energy storage system. This Section builds on protecting the energy storage system from exposure hazards to the system by prohibiting the use of fire-protection-rated glazing in 1-hour assemblies that are used to enclose energy storage systems.

716.3.2.1.2 Area limitations. The total area of the glazing in fire-protection-rated window assemblies shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of a common wall with any room.

The area limitations for interior fire windows vary from those found in Section 707.6 for fire barriers. Openings of all types in fire barriers are limited to 25 percent of the length of the wall while this section bases the limitation on fire windows to the area of the wall. Therefore, when dealing with a fire barrier, both the 25-percent length and area would be applicable. When dealing with a fire partition, only the area limitation would apply.

The phrase “common wall” will limit the size to the actual visible wall that is shared and can be seen in the two rooms. The area of the wall that continues through the interstitial space above a ceiling would not be included when determining the wall size. In addition, if the ceiling height differs on the two sides of the wall, the lowest ceiling height would be used to determine what is considered the “common wall.”

716.3.2.1.3 Where  \( \frac{3}{4} \) -hour fire-protection window assemblies permitted. Fire-protection-rated glazing shall be permitted in window assemblies tested to NFPA 257 or UL 9 in fire partitions requiring 1/3 hour opening protection in accordance with Table 716.1 (3).

While previous Sections deal with fire partitions and fire barriers, this Section addresses fire partitions requiring only 20-minute opening protectives. Fire windows with fire-protection-rated glazing are permitted in such partitions with the ratings and markings shown in Table 716.1(3).

716.3.3 Fire window frames. Fire window frames installed with a fire window assembly shall meet the fire protection rating indicated in Table 716.1 (3).

This section points to Table 716.1 (3) for minimum requirements related to fire window assemblies based on the type of assembly they are intended to be installed into. See the commentary to Table 716.1 (3) for more information.

716.3.3.1 Window mullions. Metal mullions that exceed a nominal height of 3600 mm shall be protected with materials to afford the same fire-resistance rating as required for the wall construction in which the protective is located.
Fire windows are normally tested in panels not exceeding 0.85 m \( ^{2} \)  and 1350 mm in width or length, respectively. The code does, however, permit panels to be installed adjacent to one another. This section requires that mullions higher than 3600 mm meet the criteria for fire-resistance-rated glazing (ASTM E119 or UL 263), not fire-protection-rated glazing (NFPA 257).

716.3.4 Fire-protection-rated glazing. Glazing in fire window assemblies shall be fire protection rated in accordance with this section and Table 716.1(3). Fire-protection rated glazing in fire window assemblies shall be tested in accordance with and shall meet the acceptance criteria of NFPA 257 or UL 9. Openings in non-fire-resistance-rated exterior wall assemblies that require protection in accordance with Section 705.3, 705.8, 705.8.5 or 705.8.6 shall have a fire protection rating of not less than  \( \frac{3}{4} \)  hour. Fire-protection-rated glazing in 0.5-hour fire-resistance-rated partitions is permitted to have an 0.33-hour fire protection rating.

This Section covers glazing in fire windows, not fire doors. The appropriate test standards referenced for fire windows (fire-protection-rated glazing) are NFPA 257 or UL 9, which are pass/fail tests with a specified time of exposure. It is important to realize that this Section only applies to materials that are tested in accordance with the two identified standards and intended as an opening protective in a wall that requires openings with a fire protection rating. The distinction between fire-protection-rated glazing and a fire-resistance-rated glazing must be understood. Glazing that has a fire-resistance rating is not required to comply with Section 716 if it is tested and installed in accordance with its listing (see Section 716.1.2.3). It is required in many openings where fire-protection-rated glazing is not allowed to be installed. Fire windows with fire-protection-rated glazing are only allowed in incidental use and occupancy separation fire barrier walls rated at 1 hour or less, fire partitions, smoke barriers and fire-resistance-rated exterior walls. In addition, Sections 1023.4 and 1024.5 would not allow fire windows in exit enclosures and exit passageway enclosures. The basic premise of the referenced standard is that it evaluates the ability of windows used as opening protectives to remain in place during the specified time of exposure. In addition to being subjected to a predetermined fire condition, the assembly is also subjected to a hose stream impact test. The test procedure does not measure or evaluate heat transmission or radiation through

===== Page 0616 =====
the assembly. Table 716.1(3) gives the fire ratings and the marking requirements for fire windows.

716.3.4.1 Glass and glazing. Glazing in fire window assemblies shall be fire-protection-rated glazing installed in accordance with and complying with the size limitations set forth in NFPA 80.

Nothing in this section prohibits fire-resistance-rated glazing from use in fire window assemblies installed in accordance with their listing. Fire protection-rated glazing shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 80.

716.3.5 Labeled protective assemblies. Glazing in fire window assemblies shall be labeled by an approved agency. The labels shall comply with NFPA 80 and Section 716.3.5.2.

This section points to NFPA 80 and Section 716.3.5.2 for minimum requirements related to labeling of glazing in fire window assemblies. NFPA 80 requires a permanent label. See the commentary to Section 716.3.5.2 for more information.

716.3.5.1 Fire window frames. Fire window frames shall be approved for the intended application.

This section requires fire window frames to be approved for use in the specific assembly. Note that Section 716.3.6.1 requires that frames be labeled where used with fire-protection-rated glazing.

716.3.5.2 Labeling requirements. Fire-protection-rated glazing shall bear a label or other identification showing the name of the manufacturer, the test standard and information required in Section 716.1.2.2.2 and Table 716.1(3) that shall be issued by an approved agency and permanently identified on the glazing.

This section requires fire-protection-rated glazing (see Section 716.3.4) to be labeled by an approved testing agency. This requirement enables the code user to verify that a fire window has been tested to the correct standard and that the test was properly performed by experienced people with the correct equipment. Table 716.1(3) details the necessary information required on the fire window label. Each glazed panel is to be permanently identified. These descriptive requirements are used to verify that fire window assemblies have been correctly tested. The label on each and every fire window assembly must contain the manufacturer's name, the test standard used and the fire protection rating. The label must be applied at the manufacturer's plant by the third-party inspection agency. As a reminder, fire-resistant rated glazing is not regulated by this section (see Section 716.1.2.3). Labeling requirements for fire resistance-rated glazing can be found in Section 703.4.

716.3.6 Installation. Fire window assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this section.

This section requires fire window assemblies to be installed in accordance with Section 716.3.6.1. See the commentary to Section 716.3.6.1 for more information.

716.3.6.1 Closure. Fire-protection-rated glazing shall be in the fixed position or be automatic-closing and shall be installed in labeled frames.

In order to adequately protect the opening, protection must be in place during a fire event. This is achieved by either having the glazing in a permanently fixed position or having the glazing protective actuated by a detection device. Note that although Section 716.3.5.1 only requires fire window framing to be approved for use in the specific assembly, this section requires that frames be labeled where used with fire-protection-rated glazing.

716.4 Fire protective curtain assembly. Approved fire protective curtain assemblies shall be constructed of any materials or assembly of component materials tested without hose stream in accordance with UL 10D, and shall comply with the Sections 716.4.1 through 716.4.3

Requiring that the assembly be “approved” in addition to “listed” allows the building official to specifically approve the proposed application. This Section and subSections are consistent with the scope of UL 10D, which reads, “These requirements cover the evaluation of fire protective curtain assemblies intended to provide supplemental passive fire protection as part of an engineered fire protection system. Fire protective curtain assemblies provide nonstructural separation only, and are not intended to be substituted for structural hourly rated partitions or opening protectives that have been tested for fire endurance and hose stream performance.”

716.4.1 Label. Fire protective curtain assemblies used as opening protectives in fire-rated walls and smoke partitions shall be labeled in accordance with Section 716.2.9.

Where fire protective curtain assemblies are allowed as an opening protective as permitted by other Sections of the code, assemblies must be labeled in accordance with Section 716.2.9 for labeled protective assemblies.

716.4.2 Smoke and draft control. Fire protective curtain assemblies used to protect openings where smoke and draft control assemblies are required shall comply with Section 716.2.1.4.

===== Page 0617 =====
Fire protective curtain assemblies may also be required to serve as smoke and draft control assemblies. Where this is the case, the assemblies must comply with Section 716.2.1.4 and be tested in accordance with UL 1784.

716.4.3 Installation. Fire protective curtain assemblies shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 80.

Fire protective curtain assemblies are required to be installed in accordance with NFPA 80, Standard for Fire Doors and Other Opening Protections. NFPA 80 contains installation requirements specific to several types of protected openings as described throughout Section 716.

## SECTION 717 DUCTS AND AIR TRANSFER OPENINGS

717.1 General. The provisions of this section shall govern the protection of duct penetrations and air transfer openings in assemblies required to be protected and duct penetrations in nonfire-resistance-rated floor assemblies.

Fire dampers, smoke dampers and combination fire/smoke dampers protect openings created by duct penetrations and transfer openings in assemblies required to be fire-resistance rated. Ceiling radiation dampers protect only those duct penetrations that penetrate the ceiling membrane of a fire-resistance-rated assembly. Penetrations with ducts through nonfire-resistance-rated floors are also regulated by this section. This Section includes installation, testing, rating, and actuation requirements in Sections 717.2, 717.3.1, 717.3.2 and 717.3.3, respectively. Section 717.3.1 indicates that dampers are to bear the label of an approved agency. Where dampers are provided, they must be properly maintained and, therefore, must be accessible (see Section 717.4). Section 717.5 indicates the conditions in which dampers are required at penetrations through vertical assemblies. Duct penetrations and transfer openings through horizontal assemblies, including requirements for ceiling dampers, are regulated in Section 717.6. The provisions of Section 717 are duplicated in Section 607 of SBC 501. All the requirements for protection of duct penetrations and transfer openings are found in this section. This Section is directly referenced by Sections that address vertical and horizontal fire-resistance-rated assemblies, as follows:

Exterior walls Section 705.10

Fire walls Section 706.11

Fire barriers Section 707.10
Fire partitions Section 708.9

• Smoke barriers Section 709.8

• Smoke partitions Section 710.8

• Vertical openings Section 712.1.6

• Shafts Section 713.10

• Penetrations Section 714.1.1

717.1.1 Ducts and air transfer openings. Ducts transitioning horizontally between shafts shall not require a shaft enclosure provided that the duct penetration into each associated shaft is protected with dampers complying with this section.

This section addresses a typical condition where the design requires HVAC ductwork to jog horizontally then continue vertically within the building. This is allowed without a continuous (horizontal) shaft enclosure as long as the penetrations through the vertical shafts are protected with the appropriate dampers. See Commentary Figure 717.1.1.

717.1.2 Ducts that penetrate fire-resistance-rated assemblies without dampers. Ducts that penetrate fire resistance-rated walls and are not required by this section to have fire dampers shall comply with the requirements of Sections 714.3 through 714.4.3. Ducts that penetrate horizontal assemblies not required to be contained within a shaft and not required by this section to have fire dampers shall comply with the requirements of Sections 714.5 through 714.6.2.

This Section identifies how duct penetrations are to be properly protected, either in accordance with Section 717 using fire or fire/smoke dampers or, if dampers are not required, in accordance with Section 714 with materials that have been tested to either ASTM E119, ASTM E814 or UL 263 to maintain the fire-resistance rating of the fire assembly. This Section is coordinated with Section 714.4 (fire-resistance-rated walls) and Section 714.5 (horizontal assemblies). If a duct does not require a damper, the penetration of that duct through a fire-resistance-rated assembly must be protected as a through penetration in accordance with Section 714. If a duct does require a fire damper, smoke damper or combination fire/smoke damper, the through-penetration protection requirements of Section 714 will not apply. The reason is that these dampers are fire tested as a complete assembly installed within a fire-resistance-rated wall assembly or horizontal assembly. The test and resulting listing will include not only the damper but also all required mounting hardware for the duct at the point where it penetrates the wall or floor. As long as the complete installation details in the listing are

===== Page 0618 =====
complied with, there is no need for any additional protection (e.g., per Section 714) to ensure that the fire-resistance rating of the wall assembly or horizontal assembly is maintained. However, it is possible to pass the fire test and obtain a listing for a fire damper or smoke damper without completely preventing smoke migration outside the duct, such as through the gap between the outside surface of the duct and the inside surface of the hole made to accommodate the duct. This can be quite apparent in some cases, as daylight might be visible from one side of the wall or floor assembly to the other side. This is because the tested dampers generally require a minimum gap to be provided between the damper and the wall or floor it is installed in. Although not required by the code, this gap is sometimes closed with a sealant in order to provide more complete smoke resistance for the wall or floor assembly. It is imperative that an intumescent firestop sealant not be used on the outside of the duct to seal this gap. The expansion pressure of the intumescent sealant can buckle the duct, thus hindering or preventing the proper operation of the damper under fire conditions.

The purpose of this Section is to point the user to the annular space protection requirements for ducts that penetrate nonfire-resistance-rated assemblies, where applicable. Section 717.6.3 provides options for protecting these types of penetrations, two of which contain requirements for annular space protection.

717.1.2.1 Ducts that penetrate nonfire-resistance-rated assemblies. The space around a duct penetrating a non-fire-resistance-rated floor assembly shall comply with Section 717.6.3.

The purpose of this section is to point the user to the annular space protection requirements for ducts that penetrate non-fire-resistance-rated assemblies, where applicable. The referenced section, Section 717.6.3, provides options for protecting these types of penetrations, two of which contain requirements for annular space protection.

717.2 Installation. Fire dampers, smoke dampers, combination fire/smoke dampers and ceiling radiation dampers located within air distribution and smoke control systems shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, the dampers' listing and Sections 717.2.1 through 717.2.3.

This section performs two regulating functions. First, it requires that dampers be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and listing. Such instructions will result in an installation that not only protects the penetration when the damper is actuated, but also creates a protected opening should the duct collapse. Second, this section introduces Sections 717.2.1 and 717.2.3, which address the relationship of dampers with smoke control systems and hazardous exhaust ducts.

717.2.1 Smoke control system. Where the installation of a fire damper will interfere with the operation of a required smoke control system in accordance with Section 909, approved alternative protection shall be utilized. Where mechanical systems including ducts and dampers utilized for normal building ventilation serve as part of the smoke control system, the expected performance of these systems in smoke control mode shall be addressed in the rational analysis required by Section 909.4.

Fire dampers are not permitted where they will obstruct or inhibit the proper operation of a required smoke control system. In a smoke control system, fire dampers are replaced with an alternative means of protection subject to the approval of the building official. Alternative protection may be in the form of a fire-resistance-rated shaft enclosure, steel subducts extending at least 550 mm vertically in an exhaust shaft having continuous upward airflow or a fire-resistance-rated horizontal duct enclosure. If a smoke control system is installed that is not required by the code, it is still subject to the same fire damper requirements as a required smoke control system; however, such nonmandated systems would be permitted to employ fire dampers instead of the mandatory alternative protection prescribed in this Section for required smoke control systems. A required smoke control system is an important life-safety system and the code-mandated provisions here combine with Section 909 design requirements to ensure operability. This Section does more than simply allow fire dampers to be omitted in required smoke control systems; it mandates the omission of fire dampers where such system operation could be jeopardized. Lastly, this Section allows the normal building ventilation system (HVAC) to serve as the smoke control system, as long as the performance is substantiated.

717.2.2 Hazardous exhaust ducts. Fire dampers for hazardous exhaust duct systems shall comply with SBC 501.

This Section refers the user to SBC 501. In particular, Section 510 of SBC 501 deals with hazardous exhaust systems. Hazardous exhaust can be emissions including flammable vapors, gases, fumes, mists or dusts, and airborne materials posing a health hazard. These types of duct systems are not allowed by Section 510.7.1 of SBC 501 to have fire or

===== Page 0619 =====
smoke dampers, but Section 510.7.3 of SBC 501 requires fire-resistance-rated duct enclosure construction from the point of penetrations of a fire-resistance-rated wall to the exterior. Section 510.4 of SBC 501 requires independent systems.

717.2.3 Static dampers. Fire dampers and ceiling radiation dampers that are listed for use in static systems shall only be installed in heating, ventilation and air-conditioning systems that are automatically shut down in the event of a fire.

Static-type fire dampers and ceiling radiation dampers have been evaluated only for use where the air movement is effectively stopped at the start of a fire. UL 555C has requirements to test ceiling radiation dampers for closure under dynamic or static conditions.

717.3 Damper testing, ratings and actuation. Damper testing, ratings and actuation shall be in accordance with Sections 717.3.1 through 717.3.3.

The purpose of this section is to introduce the requirements for the testing, rating and actuation of fire dampers, smoke dampers, combination fire/smoke dampers and ceiling radiation dampers.

717.3.1 Damper testing. Dampers shall be listed and labeled in accordance with the standards in this section.

1 Fire dampers shall comply with the requirements of UL 555.

2 Smoke dampers shall comply with the requirements of UL 555S.

3 Combination fire/smoke dampers shall comply with the requirements of both UL 555 and UL 555S.

4 Ceiling radiation dampers shall comply with the requirements of UL 555C or shall be tested as part of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263.

5 Corridor dampers shall comply with requirements of both UL 555 and UL 555S. Corridor dampers shall demonstrate acceptable closure performance when subjected to 0.76 meter per second velocity across the face of the damper during the UL 555 fire exposure test.

The purpose of this Section is to provide the physical testing requirements for fire dampers, smoke dampers, combination fire/smoke dampers and ceiling radiation dampers. A fire damper is a device designed to close automatically upon detection of heat, to interrupt migratory airflow and to restrict the passage of flame through duct penetrations of rated assemblies. Fire dampers are required to be tested in accordance with UL 555. The criteria for acceptance of fire dampers require that the dampers close and latch automatically, maintain prescribed limitations for movement (warping) and remain in the opening for the fire exposure period for which they are rated. In addition to being tested, fire dampers must be labeled and, in accordance with Section 1703.5, require a follow-up service.

Fire dampers are classified by UL 555 for use in static and dynamic airflow conditions. Fire dampers installed in air-distribution systems that remain in operation after smoke or heat from a fire is detected (a dynamic airflow condition) must be labeled for such use.

The manufacturer's installation instructions must be followed. Fire dampers are to be installed in the assembly such that an opening created by a duct collapse is properly protected. Dampers are to be installed in accordance with their tested application, either vertically or horizontally. Although the test criteria of UL 555 are not functions of a horizontal versus vertical application, there are specific tests required for spring-operated dampers that are not required for gravity operated types. Therefore, the type of damper used requires the building official to determine if it is acceptable for the given application.

Fire dampers are required to have the minimum fire protection rating established in Table 717.3.2.1. A smoke damper is a device installed in a duct, typically in smoke control systems or to protect smoke barrier penetrations, that operates to seal the duct against smoke leakage. Fire dampers tested to UL 555 are not rated for smoke leakage. Fire dampers are activated at a predetermined temperature using a fusible link or other heat-responsive device. Smoke dampers, on the other hand, are tested for leakage in accordance with the requirements of UL 555S and are activated by a smoke detector in the duct or area to be served.

Ceiling radiation dampers, formerly known as ceiling dampers, are designed to limit the radiative heat transfer through an air inlet/outlet opening in the ceiling membrane of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly. Ceiling radiation dampers are evaluated either in accordance with UL 555C or as part of the floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly tested to ASTM E119 or UL 263. Ceiling radiation dampers evaluated in accordance with UL 555C are investigated for use in lieu of hinged-door-type dampers commonly specified in the listing of fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies. UL 555C also provides criteria for the construction of ceiling dampers. Ceiling radiation dampers investigated as part of the

===== Page 0620 =====
fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly are specified in the listing of such assemblies. The description of the tested assembly will include a description of the ceiling damper and its installation. A fire damper is a device designed to close automatically upon detection of heat, to interrupt migratory airflow and to restrict the passage of flame through duct penetrations of rated assemblies. Since ceiling and fire dampers have different design criteria, a fire damper must not be used in place of a ceiling damper.

Corridor dampers are addressed in Item 5. This item describes the testing standards that corridor dampers must meet. Corridor dampers are also required to demonstrate acceptable closure performance when subjected to 150 fpm velocity across the face of the damper during fire exposure testing.

717.3.2 Damper rating. Damper ratings shall be in accordance with Sections 717.3.2.1 through 717.3.2.4.

The purpose of this Section is to direct code users to the requirements for the ratings of fire dampers (Section 717.3.2.1), smoke dampers (Section 717.3.2.2) and combination fire/smoke dampers (Section 717.3.2.3).

717.3.2.1 Fire damper ratings. Fire dampers shall have the minimum rating specified in Table 717.3.2.1.

This section primarily serves the purpose of requiring fire damper ratings to be determined in accordance with Table 717.3.2.1. Table 717.3.2.1 sets the minimum damper ratings based upon the type of assemblies being penetrated.

The Table summarizes the required hourly ratings for fire dampers based on the fire-resistance-rated assembly that is being penetrated by the air distribution system. The left-hand column lists the associated hourly ratings of either wall or horizontal assemblies. The code user enters the line item in the left-hand column based on the applicable fire-resistance rating of the element penetrated and reads across to the right column for the appropriate fire damper rating. These fire damper ratings are established based on tests conducted in accordance with UL 555 and represent the ratings necessary to maintain the integrity of the rated wall or horizontal assembly.

717.3.2.2 Smoke damper ratings. Smoke damper leakage ratings shall be Class I or II. Elevated temperature ratings shall be not less than 121°C.

In accordance with UL 555S, smoke dampers are marked with a temperature rating starting at 121°C and rising in increments of 38°C. Leakage ratings range from Class I to III in accordance with the standard and are further identified for tested pressure. Class I and II leakage ratings meet the code requirement for the damper to be not less than Class II.

717.3.2.3 Combination fire/smoke damper ratings. Combination fire/smoke dampers shall have the minimum rating specified for fire dampers in Table 717.3.2.1 and shall have the minimum rating specified for smoke damper in Section 717.3.2.2.

This section primarily serves the purpose of requiring the ratings of combination fire/smoke dampers to comply with the requirements for both fire and smoke dampers, including the fire protection rating specified in Table 717.3.2.1 and the leakage rating specified in Section 717.3.2.2.

717.3.2.4 Corridor damper ratings. Corridor dampers shall have the following minimum ratings:

1 One hour fire-resistance rating.

2 Class I or II leakage rating as specified in Section 717.3.2.2.

This section describes the ratings that corridor dampers must meet. Corridor dampers are listed for both a fire-resistance rating of 1 hour, and a Class I or II leakage rating as defined by the Standard UL 555S. Leakage ratings of corridor dampers are determined at an elevated temperature of 121°C or 177°C. Corridor dampers are only intended to be used to protect duct and air transfer openings in corridor ceilings, where the ceilings are constructed as required for the corridor walls (as permitted in Section 708.4, Exception 3).

717.3.3 Damper actuation. Damper actuation shall be in accordance with Sections 717.3.3.1 through 717.3.3.5 as applicable.

The purpose of this section is to provide direction to the requirements for the actuation of fire dampers (Section 717.3.3.1), smoke dampers (Section 717.3.3.2), combination fire/smoke dampers (Section 717.3.3.3) and ceiling radiation dampers (Section 717.3.3.4).

717.3.3.1 Fire damper actuation. Primary heat responsive devices used to actuate fire dampers shall meet one of the following requirements:

1 The operating temperature shall be approximately  \( 10^{\circ} \) C above the normal temperature within the duct system, but not less than  \( 71^{\circ} \) C.

2 The operating temperature shall be not more than  \( 177^{\circ} \) C where located in a smoke control system complying with Section 909.

The purpose of this section is to prescribe the actuation (operating temperature)

===== Page 0621 =====
requirements for fire dampers. The thresholds for actuation are based on UL 555. For static systems, UL 555 identifies  \( 71^{\circ} \) C as the minimum and  \( 102^{\circ} \) C as the maximum temperature (see Item 1). For dynamic systems, the standard includes a minimum value of  \( 71^{\circ} \) C and a maximum value of  \( 177^{\circ} \) C (see Item 2).

717.3.3.2 Smoke damper actuation. The smoke damper shall close upon actuation of a listed smoke detector or detectors installed in accordance with Section 907.3 and one of the following methods, as applicable:

1 Where a smoke damper is installed within a duct, a smoke detector shall be installed inside the duct or outside the duct with sampling tubes protruding into the duct. The detector or tubes within the duct shall be within 1500 mm of the damper. Air outlets and inlets shall not be located between the detector or tubes and the damper. The detector shall be listed for the air velocity, temperature and humidity anticipated at the point where it is installed. Other than in mechanical smoke control systems, dampers shall be closed upon fan shutdown where local smoke detectors require a minimum velocity to operate.

2 Where a smoke damper is installed above smoke barrier doors in a smoke barrier, a spot-type detector shall be installed on either side of the smoke barrier door opening. The detector shall be listed for releasing service if used for direct interface with the damper.

3 Where a smoke damper is installed within an air transfer opening in a wall, a spot-type detector shall be installed within 1500 mm horizontally of the damper. The detector shall be listed for releasing service if used for direct interface with the damper.

4 Where a smoke damper is installed in a corridor wall or ceiling, the damper shall be permitted to be controlled by a smoke detection system installed in the corridor.

5 Where a smoke detection system is installed in all areas served by the duct in which the damper will be located, the smoke dampers shall be permitted to be controlled by the smoke detection system.

This section provides specific requirements to ensure that an installed detector will detect smoke (see Item 1). Additionally, for passive systems (not part of a smoke control system), the location of detectors is critical to their performance. Smoke dampers are installed in not only duct penetrations, but also transfer openings. A method for properly controlling dampers in such arrangements is provided in Item 3. A smoke detector provided throughout a corridor, or an entire area detects smoke more effectively than a duct-type detector. Such detection is necessary for controlling dampers (Items 4 and 5). Smoke dampers may also be operated remotely, especially when used as part of a smoke control system. Combination fire/smoke dampers can be activated by either heat or smoke sensors. Once the primary heat-sensing device has been activated, a remote-control system can be used to open the damper to permit its use as a smoke damper in the smoke removal system. Then, if the temperature rises to the damper's maximum degradation test temperature, the secondary heat sensor closes the damper again.

717.3.3.3 Combination fire/smoke damper actuation. Combination fire/smoke damper actuation shall be in accordance with Sections 717.3.3.1 and 717.3.3.2. Combination fire/smoke dampers installed in smoke control system shaft penetrations shall not be activated by local area smoke detection unless it is secondary to the smoke management system controls.

This Section primarily serves to require that the actuation of combination fire/smoke dampers complies with the requirements for both fire and smoke dampers, including the requirements in Sections 717.3.3.1 and 717.3.3.2. Further, where these dampers are used as part of a smoke control system, this Section prohibits activation of these dampers by local area smoke detectors because this could render the smoke control system inoperable.

717.3.3.4 Ceiling radiation damper actuation. The operating temperature of a ceiling radiation damper actuation device shall be  \( 10^{\circ} \) C above the normal temperature within the duct system, but not less than  \( 71^{\circ} \) C.

The purpose of this section is to prescribe the actuation (operating temperature) requirements for ceiling radiation dampers. The thresholds for actuation are similar to those required for fire dampers used in static systems.

717.3.3.5 Corridor damper actuation. Corridor damper actuation shall be in accordance with Sections 717.3.3.1 and 717.3.3.2.

This section addresses the actuation criteria for corridor dampers using existing criteria for both fire dampers and smoke dampers.

717.4 Access and identification. Access and identification of fire and smoke dampers shall comply with Sections 717.4.1 through 717.4.2.

===== Page 0622 =====
Access and identification must comply with Sections 717.4.1 and 717.4.2.

717.4.1 Access. Fire and smoke dampers shall be provided with an approved means of access that is large enough to permit inspection and maintenance of the damper and its operating parts. Dampers equipped with fusible links, internal operators, or both shall be provided with an access door that is not less than 300 mm square or provided with a removable duct section.

Fire and smoke dampers and combination dampers must be properly maintained so that they will operate as intended. The need to maintain dampers, as well as reset them and replace fusible links after operation, requires that they be accessible as a part of the initial design in the code.

717.4.1.1 Access openings. The access shall not affect the integrity of fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The access openings shall not reduce the fire-resistance rating of the assembly. Access doors in ducts shall be tight fitting and suitable for the required duct construction.

Depending on the location of the doors, in order to maintain a fire-resistance rating, access doors may need to be fire doors in accordance with Section 716. Access doors in the duct itself do not need a fire protection rating.

717.4.1.2 Restricted access. Where space constraints or physical barriers restrict access to a damper for periodic inspection and testing, the damper shall be a single- or multi-blade type damper and shall comply with the remote inspection requirements of NFPA 80 or NFPA 105.

It is important for the design professional to be aware of the inspection and testing requirements since they impact the access requirements contained in this code. This Section provides design professionals with remote testing as an alternative (as permitted by NFPA 80 and NFPA 105) in situations where adequate access for inspection and testing cannot be provided.

717.4.2 Identification. Access points shall be permanently identified on the exterior by a label having letters not less than 12.5 mm in height reading: "FIRE/SMOKE DAMPER," "SMOKE DAMPER" or "FIRE DAMPER."

Proper identification of the access points is mandatory. Access points must be labeled, clear and permanently identified.

717.5 Where required. Fire, dampers, smoke dampers, combination fire/smoke dampers, ceiling radiation dampers and corridor dampers shall be provided at the locations prescribed in Sections 717.5.1 through 717.5.7 and 717.6. Where an assembly is required to have both fire dampers and smoke dampers, combination fire/smoke dampers or a fire damper and a smoke damper shall be provided.

In order to maintain the fire-resistance rating of fire and smoke vertical walls, barriers and partitions, code-required dampers must be provided for all duct penetrations. Fire dampers are to be installed in the assembly such that an opening created by a duct collapse is properly protected. The manufacturer's installation instructions, which should indicate how the damper is to be installed, must be followed so that the operation and functioning of the installed assembly will be consistent with that required by the code.

Commentary Figure 717.5 shows the difference between where a fire damper is required and where one is not. In this example, the designer has chosen to separate mixed occupancies in accordance with the option of Section 508.4.4. The occupancy separation wall (fire barrier) that is required to be fire-resistance rated is also required to have the duct penetration protected by a fire damper, while the non-rated wall requires no such protection. Occasionally, the visible gap between the outside of the dampered duct and the inside surface of the hole in a wall or floor that accommodates the duct is closed with a sealant. Although not required by the code, this is occasionally done to provide more complete smoke resistance for the wall or floor assembly. The installation of the damper assembly in accordance with the listing and manufacturer's instructions will provide the required fire resistance, even without sealing any apparent gaps between the duct and the hole. It is imperative that an intumescing firestop sealant not be used on the outside of the duct to seal this gap. The expansion pressure of the intumescing sealant can buckle the duct, thus hindering or preventing the proper operation of the damper under fire conditions.

The code requires that a fire damper not be used as a smoke damper unless the location of the installation is appropriate for the dual purpose. The most likely location for this to occur would be where the air distribution system also serves as a smoke control system and a duct penetrates a fire-resistance-rated assembly. Section 717.2.1 requires alternative protection to be provided where fire dampers will interfere with the operation of a smoke control system. A combination fire/smoke damper, such as that described above, may be approved for use as alternative protection.

717.5.1 Fire walls. Ducts and air transfer openings permitted in fire walls in accordance with Section

===== Page 0623 =====
706.11 shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing.

Fire walls can create separate buildings within a structure. These multiple buildings may be on a single lot or, in the case of zero lot line construction, the fire wall may be located on the lot line. In the case where the fire wall separates different buildings on different lots, the code does not permit openings (see Sections 706.1.1 and 706.11). In such instances, a duct penetration is not permitted. Where the fire wall is not located on a lot line, the wall is permitted to be penetrated by a duct or transfer opening, provided that the opening is protected with a listed fire damper. The fire damper in 3-hour and greater fire-resistance-rated walls must be rated for 3 hours.

717.5.1.1 Horizontal exits. A listed smoke damper designed to resist the passage of smoke shall be provided at each point a duct or air transfer opening penetrates a fire wall that serves as a horizontal exit.

* Recognizing that fire walls can jointly serve as horizontal exits, this section requires ducts and air transfer opening penetrations of such walls to be provided with smoke dampers. The purpose of this section is to recognize that horizontal exits are required to resist the passage of smoke as well as fire.

717.5.2 Fire barriers. Ducts and air transfer openings of fire barriers shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing. Ducts and air transfer openings shall not penetrate enclosures for interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways, except as permitted by Sections 1023.5 and 1024.6, respectively.

Exception: Fire dampers are not required at penetrations of fire barriers where any of the following apply:

1. Penetrations are tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 as part of the fire-resistance-rated assembly.

2. Ducts are used as part of an approved smoke control system in accordance with Section 909 and where the use of a fire damper would interfere with the operation of a smoke control system.

3. Such walls are penetrated by fully ducted HVAC systems, have a required fire-resistance rating of 1 hour or less, are in areas of other than Group H and are in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. For the purposes of this exception, a fully ducted HVAC system shall be a duct system for conveying supply, return or exhaust air as part of the structure's HVAC system. Such a duct system shall be constructed of sheet steel not less than 0.47 mm (No. 26 gage) thickness and shall be continuous from the air-handling appliance or equipment to the air outlet and inlet terminals. Nonmetal flexible air connectors shall be permitted in the following locations:

3.1. At the duct connection to the air handling unit or equipment located within the mechanical room in accordance with Section 603.9 of SBC 501.

3.2. From an overhead metal duct to a ceiling diffuser within the same room in accordance with Section 603.6.2 of SBC 501.

Fire barriers require fire dampers at duct and transfer openings. However, ducts and transfer openings are not allowed to penetrate stairway and exit passageway enclosures even with fire dampers. Of course, independent stair pressurization ductwork may penetrate the stairway enclosure in accordance with Sections 1024.5 and 1025.6. Penetration of an exit has the potential to allow smoke or flame to be introduced into the enclosure from other parts of the building, effectively blocking the exit path.

Exception 1 states that fire dampers are not required for duct penetrations of fire barriers where the assembly has been tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 without fire dampers and the required fire-resistance rating is obtained. In this case, the penetration assembly has been demonstrated as preserving the fire-resistance rating of the wall assembly.

Exception 2 reinforces the provisions of Section 717.2.1 (see commentary). A fire damper may interfere with the operation of the smoke control system; however, some form of alternative protection must be provided due to the duct penetrating the fire barrier.

Exception 3 states that, in fully sprinklered buildings containing occupancies other than Group H, fire dampers may be omitted in duct penetrations of walls having a fire-resistance rating of 1 hour or less. Such duct systems must be 0.47 mm steel continuous from the air handler to the air outlet with no flex duct connectors.

This exception is intended to more accurately reflect typical installations found in most buildings. The text does not imply that any flex duct (or equipment flexible connections) negates the use of the exception for fire

===== Page 0624 =====
dampers in 1-hour walls in fully ducted, fully sprinklered buildings. The exception permits the omission of the fire damper for a metal duct system that terminates at a wall (such as a sidewall grille) or continues on to a duct opening past the fire barrier and has openings in the duct ("continuous from the air-handling appliance or equipment to the air outlet and inlet terminals"). This Section does not prohibit openings to be on both sides of the duct as long as the openings are in metal duct. The flex connection within the concealed space does not constitute a greater hazard than other conditions that would permit the omission of the fire dampers [see Commentary Figure 717.5.2(1)]. This Section coordinates with the requirements already established in SBC 501. SBC 501 Section 603.6.3 limits the design air temperature for flexible air connectors to 120°C. Under the vast majority of conditions where flexible air connectors will be used, calculations can demonstrate that sprinkler response will occur before the ceiling jet temperature from a fire reaches the limit of Section 603.6.3.

The intention is to maintain the allowance of flexible connectors at the terminal end of hard ductwork within the room of the air register.

The Section is not intended to allow flexible ducts through any vertical barriers (as already prohibited by Section 717.7). The flexible ductwork is only to be allowed within a room, and above the ceiling. See Commentary Figure 717.5.2(2).

717.5.2.1 Horizontal exits. A listed smoke damper designed to resist the passage of smoke shall be provided at each point a duct or air transfer opening penetrates a fire barrier that serves as a horizontal exit.

Walls separating buildings into areas of refuge in accordance with Section 1025 are specific types of fire barrier walls. The purpose of this section is to recognize that horizontal exits are required to resist the passage of smoke as well as fire. This section, therefore, requires that smoke dampers be installed at ducts or transfer openings that penetrate a fire barrier wall used as a horizontal exit.

717.5.3 Shaft enclosures. Shaft enclosures that are permitted to be penetrated by ducts and air transfer openings shall be protected with listed fire and smoke dampers installed in accordance with their listing.

Exceptions:

1. Fire dampers are not required at penetrations of shafts where any of the following criteria are met:

1.1. Steel exhaust subducts having a wall thickness of not less than 0.47 mm are extended not less than 550 mm vertically in exhaust shafts, and an exhaust fan is installed at the upper terminus of the shaft that is powered continuously in accordance with Section 909.11, so as to maintain a continuous upward airflow to the outdoors.

1.2. Penetrations are tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263 as part of the fire-resistance-rated assembly.

1.3. Ducts are used as part of an approved smoke control system designed and installed in accordance with Section 909 and where the fire damper will interfere with the operation of the smoke control system.

1.4. The penetrations are in parking garage exhaust or supply shafts that are separated from other building shafts by not less than 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

2. In Group B and R occupancies equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, smoke dampers are not required at penetrations of shafts where all of the following criteria are met:

2.1. Kitchen, clothes dryer, bathroom and toilet room exhaust openings are installed with steel exhaust subducts, having a wall thickness of not less than 0.47 mm.

2.2. The subducts extend not less than 550 mm vertically.

2.3. An exhaust fan is installed at the upper terminus of the shaft that is powered continuously in accordance with the provisions of Section 909.11, so as to maintain a continuous upward airflow to the outdoors.

3. Smoke dampers are not required at penetration of exhaust or supply shafts in parking garages that are separated from other building shafts by not less than 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

4. Smoke dampers are not required at penetrations of shafts where ducts are used as part of an approved mechanical smoke control system designed in accordance with Section 909 and where the smoke damper will interfere with the operation of the smoke control system.

5. Fire dampers and combination fire/smoke dampers are not required in kitchen and

===== Page 0625 =====
clothes dryer exhaust systems where dampers are prohibited by SBC 501.

This section requires both fire and smoke dampers at duct and air transfer openings in the shaft wall. The fire damper is required due to the penetration of a fire-resistance-rated wall. The smoke damper is required in order to limit the migration of smoke to other parts of the building via the shaft and the chimney effect (see commentary, Section 713.1). The exceptions allow the omission of fire dampers and smoke dampers under certain conditions. Exception 1 addresses fire dampers. Exceptions 2, 3 and 4 address smoke dampers. Exception 4 addresses the interface with smoke control systems as designed in Section 909, and coordinates with Section 717.2.1. Exception 5 addresses both fire and fire/smoke dampers, but not smoke dampers. When applying the exceptions, remember both fire and smoke dampers are required for shaft wall penetrations by ducts. Some exceptions only address one and not the other. Exceptions can be combined.

Exceptions 1.1 thru 1.4 only exempt fire dampers.

Exception 1.1 recognizes that the presence of a vertical subduct in a shaft will also offer some degree of fire resistance should the duct outside of the shaft collapse. Steel exhaust ducts that consist of a 550 mm vertical upturn in the shaft need not be protected with a fire damper if there is a continuous upward airflow to the outside. The continuous airflow will create a negative pressure in the shaft as compared to adjacent spaces, thereby minimizing the spread of hot gases from the shaft [see Commentary Figure 717.5.3(1)]. Section 717.5.3 requires fire and smoke dampers where the interconnecting duct penetrates the walls of each shaft enclosure. However, such use would cut off the continuous airflow through the shaft that does not contain the exhaust fan. This exception resolves that issue by stating that fire and smoke dampers shall not be installed where such installation would result in a loss of this airflow path. From there, since the penetrations are not protected with a fire damper, Section 717.1.2 requires the penetrations to be protected with a through-penetration firestop system.

Exceptions 1.2 and 1.3 are identical to Exceptions 1 and 2 to Section 717.5.2 (see commentary, Section 717.5.2).

Exception 1.4 states that fire dampers may also be omitted in exhaust and supply shafts that serve a garage and are separated from all other shafts in the building by a 2-hour fire separation assembly [see Commentary Figure 717.5.3(2)]. Requiring fire dampers in garage exhaust and supply shafts would not significantly prevent the spread of smoke and fire within the garage, since the vehicle ramp from floor to floor is a much greater conduit of smoke and fire in a garage.

Exception 2 is specific to Group B and R occupancies and exempts smoke dampers. Exception 2 has many more conditions than Exception 1.1, but together they can be used to exempt both fire and smoke dampers.

Exception 3 addresses parking garage shafts for exhaust and supply ducts and exempts smoke dampers, whereas Exception 1.4 exempts fire dampers.

The conditions for the exception are the same. Exception 4 is the counterpart to Exception 1.3. One exempts the fire damper and one exempts the smoke damper.

Exception 5 exempts fire dampers and combination fire/smoke dampers from kitchen and clothes dryer exhaust systems where dampers are prohibited in accordance with SBC 501. This is to recognize the hazards associated with obstructing the airflow for these installations. SBC 501 requires a shaft for multiple-floor kitchen and clothes dryer exhaust systems and requires 550 mm subducts and special construction in accordance with Section 504.8 of SBC 501. The fact that fire dampers and combination fire/smoke dampers are not required does not exempt the requirement for smoke dampers. However, Exception 2 of this Section can be used.

717.5.3.1 Continuous upward airflow. Fire dampers and smoke dampers shall not be installed in shafts that are required to maintain a continuous upward airflow path where closure of the damper would result in the loss of the airflow.

Fire dampers or smoke dampers installed in the airport in a manner that would cut off the upward airflow through the shaft to the exhaust fan at the top of the shaft when the damper closes would negate the effectiveness of the subducts. An example of where this situation might occur is with two offset shafts, one with an exhaust fan on one without, connected together with a horizontal duct.

717.5.4 Fire partitions. Ducts and air transfer openings that penetrate fire partitions shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing.

Exceptions: In occupancies other than Group H, fire dampers are not required where any of the following apply:

1. Corridor walls in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section

===== Page 0626 =====
903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and the duct is protected as a through penetration in accordance with Section 714.

2. Tenant partitions in covered and open mall buildings where the walls are not required by provisions elsewhere in the code to extend to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, slab or deck above.

3. The duct system is constructed of approved materials in accordance with SBC 501 and the duct penetrating the wall complies with all of the following requirements:

3.1. The duct shall not exceed 0.06 m².

3.2. The duct shall be constructed of steel not less than 0.55 mm in thickness.

3.3. The duct shall not have openings that communicate the corridor with adjacent spaces or rooms.

3.4. The duct shall be installed above a ceiling.

3.5. The duct shall not terminate at a wall register in the fire-resistance-rated wall.

3.6. A minimum 300 mm by 1.5 mm thick steel sleeve shall be centered in each duct opening. The sleeve shall be secured to both sides of the wall and all four sides of the sleeve with minimum 40 mm by 40 mm by 1.5 mm steel retaining angles. The retaining angles shall be secured to the sleeve and the wall with M5 screws. The annular space between the steel sleeve and the wall opening shall be filled with mineral wool batting on all sides.

4. Such walls are penetrated by ducted HVAC systems, have a required fire-resistance rating of 1 hour or less, and are in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. For the purposes of this exception, a ducted HVAC system shall be a duct system for conveying supply, return or exhaust air as part of the structure's HVAC system. Such a duct system shall be constructed of sheet steel not less than 0.47 mm thickness and shall be continuous from the air-handling appliance or equipment to the air outlet and inlet terminals.

Fire dampers are required when a duct or air transfer opening penetrates a fire partition and must be listed for the fire rating of the partition and installed in accordance with the listing. Please note that corridor walls, where required to be separated by Section 1020.2, must have duct penetrations or transfer openings protected with smoke dampers unless exempted by Section 717.5.4.1. This section includes four exceptions to the fire damper requirement.

Exception 1 addresses fire-resistance-rated corridor walls. In fully sprinkled buildings, corridor wall penetrations by ducts or air transfer openings need not have fire dampers but they still are required to have smoke dampers by Section 717.5.4.1 unless further exempted there. Remember that duct penetrations that are exempted from fire dampers are required by Section 717.1.2 to have through penetration firestops [see Commentary Figure 717.5.4(1)].

Exception 2 coordinates with Exception 4 to Section 708.4 and addresses standard construction designs for mall buildings as they relate to open ceiling spaces. The exception removes an implied requirement for dampers where logic would dictate none is required. This provision recognizes that walls separating tenants in a covered mall are required to be rated but are allowed to stop at unratted ceilings and storefronts, providing no true separation. Therefore, it does not make sense to require a damper through the wall. If the tenant separation wall is required to be continuous to a roof deck or rated floor assembly for another purpose, the fire dampers would obviously be required.

Exception 3 states that fire dampers are not required where a steel duct penetrates a wall but does not have openings serving adjacent rooms or spaces [see Commentary Figure 717.5.4(2)] This exception has several criteria, one of which is to utilize a steel sleeve with mineral wool batting on all sides. Steel ducts have been shown to have the ability to remain in place during severe fire exposures. With no openings into the corridor to allow for smoke and heat transfer in the protected corridor enclosure, a fire damper is not necessary to attain the required fire performance of the penetration.

Exception 4 is similar to Exception 1. Exception 4 exempts all ducted penetrations of all fire partitions and not just corridor wall penetrations. Exception 4, in addition to the sprinkler provision, requires all steel ducts and does not allow flexible duct connectors. For corridors, Exception 1 is easier. Both exceptions would require through-penetration protection in accordance with Section 717.1.2. Exception 4 is identical to Exception 3 for fire barrier duct penetrations in Section 717.5.2.

===== Page 0627 =====
717.5.4.1 Corridors. Duct and air transfer openings that penetrate corridors shall be protected with dampers as follows:

1 A corridor damper shall be provided where corridor ceilings, constructed as required for the corridor walls as permitted in Section 708.4, Exception 3, are penetrated.

2 A ceiling radiation damper shall be provided where the ceiling membrane of a fire-resistance-rated floor-ceiling or roof-ceiling assembly, constructed as permitted in Section 708.4, Exception 2, is penetrated.

3 A listed smoke damper designed to resist the passage of smoke shall be provided at each point a duct or air transfer opening penetrates a corridor enclosure required to have smoke and draft control doors in accordance with Section 716.2.2.1.

Exceptions:

1. Smoke dampers are not required where the building is equipped throughout with an approved smoke control system in accordance with Section 909, and smoke dampers are not necessary for the operation and control of the system.

2. Smoke dampers are not required in corridor penetrations where the duct is constructed of steel not less than 0.48 mm in thickness and there are no openings serving the corridor.

Protecting the corridors from smoke during a fire incident is important for egress from the buildings. Consistent with the door opening protection requirements of Section 716.2.2.1, penetration of ducts and air transfer openings require minimum protection. Therefore, all fire-rated corridor walls penetrated by ducts or air transfer openings must have listed dampers that are suited to three different conditions as follows:

1 Where the corridor ceiling is constructed to provide a fire rating equivalent to that of the corridor walls, corridor dampers are required.

2 Where the corridor ceiling is protected by a ceiling membrane in accordance with Item 2 of Section 708.4, ceiling radiation dampers are required.

3 For conditions other than 1 and 2, smoke dampers are required.

Exception 1 cites the concern of the damper interfering with the smoke control system (see commentary, Section 717.2.1).

Exception 2 exempts the duct penetration from smoke dampers where a steel duct penetrates the corridor walls and there are no duct outlets or openings serving the corridor.
717.5.5 Smoke barriers. A listed smoke damper designed to resist the passage of smoke shall be provided at each point a duct or air transfer opening penetrates a smoke barrier. Smoke dampers and smoke damper actuation methods shall comply with Section 717.3.3.2.

Exceptions:

1 Smoke dampers are not required where the openings in ducts are limited to a single smoke compartment and the ducts are constructed of steel.

2 Smoke dampers are not required in smoke barriers required by Section 407.5, for Group I-2, Condition 2 where the HVAC system is fully ducted in accordance with Section 603 of SBC 501 and where buildings are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and equipped with quick-response sprinklers in accordance with Section 903.3.2.

Smoke barriers are required for both Group I-2 and I-3 occupancies. See the commentary to Section 709.1 for other applications of smoke barriers. The concept of requiring smoke barriers is to limit the migration of smoke. In fact, Section 709.4 requires that smoke barriers form an effective continuous membrane from outside wall to outside wall and from the floor slab to the floor or roof deck above. This would include continuity through concealed spaces, such as those found above suspended ceilings and interstitial structural and mechanical spaces.

To prevent smoke migration across the smoke barrier where duct penetrations occur, an approved damper designed to resist the passage of smoke is to be provided at each point where a duct penetrates a smoke barrier. The damper closes upon detection of smoke by an approved smoke detector within the duct. If the duct penetration is above a smoke barrier door assembly, smoke detectors for adjacent doors may also be used to operate the damper and the duct detector may be eliminated. A reference to Section 717.3.3.2 is provided for activation mechanisms.

The designer must evaluate the specific conditions of the installation to determine which class of damper should be installed. If a fire damper is required (i.e., the smoke barrier is also a mixed occupancy separation or corridor wall), a combination fire/smoke damper or separate fire and smoke dampers may be installed.

Exception 1 eliminates the need for smoke dampers, provided that the duct openings are limited to one smoke compartment and the

===== Page 0628 =====
ducts are of a construction (steel) that inherently resists the passage of smoke for a duration of time.

Exception 2 eliminates the need for smoke dampers in care facilities and Group I-2 hospital occupancies under specific conditions. These facilities are fully protected with tested, maintained and electronically supervised quick-response automatic sprinkler systems. The meaningful time of fire protection of a building occurs in the first 30 minutes of a fire incident, when decisions are made by fire professionals and the safety staff of the hospital in terms of status of the patients. Quick-response sprinklers are more often noted as the most important feature of the overall building fire protection system and are demonstrated to be more effective in containing the spread of fire than dampening of the duct system.

717.5.6 Exterior walls. Ducts and air transfer openings in fire-resistance-rated exterior walls required to have protected openings in accordance with Section 705.10 shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing.

The purpose of this section is to recognize that under certain conditions exterior walls are required to be fire-resistance rated. Depending on the fire separation distance, not all fire-resistance-rated exterior walls require protected openings. If protected openings are required by Section 705.10, then fire dampers are required.

717.5.7 Smoke partitions. A listed smoke damper designed to resist the passage of smoke shall be provided at each point that an air transfer opening penetrates a smoke partition. Smoke dampers and smoke damper actuation methods shall comply with Section 717.3.3.2.

Exception: Where the installation of a smoke damper will interfere with the operation of a required smoke control system in accordance with Section 909, approved alternative protection shall be utilized.

The purpose of this Section is to recognize that penetrations of smoke partitions by air transfer openings must resist the transfer of smoke and, therefore, are required to be provided with a smoke damper. This is also consistent with the requirements in Section 710.8. This Section also requires the actuation of the damper to comply with Section 717.3.3.2. The exception cites the concern of the damper interfering with the smoke control system (see commentary, Section 717.2.1).
717.6 Horizontal assemblies. Penetrations by ducts and air transfer openings of a floor, floor/ceiling assembly or the ceiling membrane of a roof/ceiling assembly shall be protected by a shaft enclosure that complies with Section 713 or shall comply with Sections 717.6.1 through 717.6.3.

In general, all floor openings that connect two or more stories are to be enclosed in shafts that are constructed in accordance with Section 713. Section 712.1.6 references Section 717.6 for duct openings (penetration). Sections 717.6.1 through 717.6.3 identify conditions where a shaft is not required and either a fire damper (see Section 717.6.1) or ceiling radiation damper (see Section 717.6.2.1) is required. There is an exception within Section 717.6.1 that allows the elimination of the fire damper; however, ceiling radiation damper would still be required in some cases (see Section 717.6.2.1).

717.6.1 Through penetrations. In occupancies other than Groups I-2 and I-3, a duct constructed of approved materials in accordance with SBC 501 that penetrates a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling assembly that connects not more than two stories is permitted without shaft enclosure protection, provided that a listed fire damper is installed at the floor line or the duct is protected in accordance with Section 714.5. For air transfer openings, see Section 712.1.9.

Exception: A duct is permitted to penetrate three floors or less without a fire damper at each floor, provided that such duct meets all of the following requirements:

1 The duct shall be contained and located within the cavity of a wall and shall be constructed of steel having a minimum wall thickness of 0.47 mm.

2 The duct shall open into only one dwelling or sleeping unit and the duct system shall be continuous from the unit to the exterior of the building.

3 The duct shall not exceed 100 mm nominal diameter and the total area of such ducts shall not exceed 0.065 m \( ^{2} \)  in any 9 m \( ^{2} \)  of floor area.

4 The annular space around the duct is protected with materials that prevent the passage of flame and hot gases sufficient to ignite cotton waste where subjected to ASTM E 119 or UL 263 time-temperature conditions under a minimum positive pressure differential of 2.5 Pa at the location of the penetration for the time period equivalent to the fire-resistance rating of the construction penetrated.

===== Page 0629 =====
5 Grille openings located in a ceiling of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly shall be protected with a listed ceiling radiation damper installed in accordance with Section 717.6.2.1.

Penetrations of a fire-resistance-rated horizontal assembly by air ducts are permitted where no more than two stories are connected (i.e., the duct penetrates a single floor) and a fire damper is provided at the floor line. The fire damper must be tested in accordance with UL 555 [see Commentary Figure 717.6.1(1)]. A roof assembly penetrated by a duct that is open to the atmosphere is not required to have a fire damper installed at the penetrations because it is considered acceptable for the fire to vent to the out-side atmosphere and heat or fire extension will do no harm [see Commentary Figure 717.6.1(2)]. However, a ceiling radiation damper would still be needed to protect a roof/ceiling assembly per Section 717.6.2, Item 2. As noted, there is an exception to this section that allows the elimination of fire dampers at each floor where the ducts extend through a maximum of three floors. There are several criteria that must be followed to allow this, including:

• Minimum duct thickness (increases time for heat to penetrate and provides more durability) and enclosure within wall cavity.

• Limitation to a single sleeping unit or dwelling unit (to reduce the likelihood that one dwelling unit or sleeping unit will be able to endanger another).

• Size of the duct opening (smaller opening means smaller amounts of fire effluents).

• Annular protection (reduces the chance of duct leakage from penetrated walls/barriers).

• Ceiling radiation dampers at grilles in fire-resistant ceilings (maintains ceiling fire resistance).

All criteria center on limiting the impact of hot gases being present and spreading from one area to another. As noted, Section 712.1.8 addresses air transfer openings.

717.6.2 Membrane penetrations. Ducts and air transfer openings constructed of approved materials in accordance with SBC 501 that penetrate the ceiling membrane of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly shall be protected with one of the following:

1 A shaft enclosure in accordance with Section 713.

2 A listed ceiling radiation damper installed at the ceiling line where a duct penetrates the ceiling of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly.

Exceptions:

1. A fire-resistance-rated assembly tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 showing that ceiling radiation dampers are not required in order to maintain the fire resistance rating of the assembly.

2. Where exhaust duct or outdoor air duct penetrations protected in accordance with Section 714.5.2 are located within the cavity of a wall and do not pass through another dwelling unit or tenant space.

3. Where duct and air transfer openings are protected with a duct outlet penetration system tested as part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263.

3 A listed ceiling radiation damper installed at the ceiling line where a diffuser with no duct attached penetrates the ceiling of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly.

Exceptions:

1. A fire-resistance-rated assembly tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 showing that ceiling radiation dampers are not required in order to maintain the fire resistance rating of the assembly.

2. Where duct and air transfer openings are protected with a duct outlet penetration system tested as part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263.

Unless the duct system is protected with a shaft enclosure in accordance with Sections 713 and 714.5, a ceiling radiation damper, as described in Section 717.6.2.1, is to be installed at the line where the ceiling is both penetrated by a noncombustible air duct and is an integral component of the fire-resistance rating.

The requirement for a ceiling radiation damper applies to ductwork that either penetrates a ceiling membrane from above and continues downward, or where a diffuser with no ductwork attached below penetrates a ceiling membrane. Ceiling diffusers without ducts attached above or below are also covered by this section. Section 717.6.1 contains the requirements for fire dampers where the duct penetrates through the entire assembly [see Commentary Figure 717.6.1(1) and Figure 717.6.1(2) for ceiling radiation damper and fire damper locations]. There are three exceptions to Item 2: Exception 1 to the ceiling radiation dampers is for ceiling membrane penetrations by ducts or ceiling diffusers that have been

===== Page 0630 =====
tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 as part of the overall fire-resistance-rated assembly.

Exception 2 is for exhaust ducts that penetrate a ceiling and are protected in accordance with Section 714.4.2; are located within the cavity of a wall above; and do not pass through another dwelling unit or tenant space.

Exception 3 permits the use of duct protection methods other than ceiling radiation dampers for protecting ducts and air transfer openings through the ceiling membrane of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly. The acceptance of the alternative duct protection system is based on testing conducted in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263.

Ceiling radiation dampers are designed to limit the radiative heat transfer through an air inlet or outlet opening in the ceiling membrane of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly. There are two exceptions to Item 3: One exception is for ceiling membrane penetrations by ducts or ceiling diffusers that have been tested in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 as part of the overall fire-resistance rated assembly. The second exception permits the use of duct protection methods other than ceiling radiation dampers for ducts and air transfer openings through the ceiling membrane of a fire-resistance rated floor/ceiling assembly. The acceptance of the alternative duct protection system is based on testing conducted in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263.

717.6.2.1 Ceiling radiation dampers testing and installation. Ceiling radiation dampers shall be tested in accordance with Section 717.3.1. Ceiling radiation dampers shall be installed in accordance with the details listed in the fire-resistance-rated assembly and the manufacturer's instructions and the listing.

Ceiling radiation dampers, formerly known as ceiling dampers, are evaluated either in accordance with UL 555C or as part of the floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly tested to ASTM E119 or UL 263. Ceiling radiation dampers evaluated in accordance with UL 555C are investigated for use in lieu of hinged-door-type dampers commonly specified in the listing of fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies. UL 555C also provides criteria for the construction of ceiling radiation dampers. If the fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly does not incorporate a hinged-door-type damper, a ceiling radiation damper may not be utilized in the assembly. Ceiling radiation dampers investigated as part of the fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly are specified in the listing of such assemblies. The description of the tested assembly will include a description of the ceiling radiation damper and its installation. Both types of ceiling radiation dampers shall be installed in accordance with the details listed in the fire-resistance-rated assembly and the manufacturer's installation instructions and listing.

The design information Section of the UL Fire Resistance Directory also includes two duct outlet protection systems. "Duct Outlet Protection System A" may be used where specified in the fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly. "Duct Outlet Protection System B" may be used in lieu of hinged-door-type dampers commonly specified in the listing of fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies.

717.6.2.1.1 Dynamic systems. Only ceiling radiation dampers labeled for use in dynamic systems shall be installed in heating, ventilation and air-conditioning systems designed to operate with fans on during a fire.

Fire dampers and ceiling radiation dampers that are listed for use in static HVAC systems are not designed to close against the force of airflow moving through a duct or opening; therefore, they are dependable only where installed in an HVAC system that will automatically shut down during a fire event. If air movement will not be automatically shut down during a fire event, such dampers must be listed as a type intended to close against air flow (i.e., dynamic).

717.6.2.1.2 Static systems. Static ceiling radiation dampers shall be provided with systems that are not designed to operate during a fire.

Exceptions:

1. Where a static ceiling radiation damper is installed at the opening of a duct, a smoke detector shall be installed inside the duct or outside the duct with sampling tubes protruding into the duct. The detector or tubes in the duct shall be within 1500 mm of the damper. Air outlets and inlets shall not be located between the detector or tubes and the damper. The detector shall be listed for the air velocity, temperature and humidity anticipated at the point where it is installed. Other than in mechanical smoke control systems, dampers shall be closed upon fan shutdown where local smoke detectors require a minimum velocity to operate.

===== Page 0631 =====
2. Where a static ceiling radiation damper is installed in a ceiling, the ceiling radiation damper shall be permitted to be controlled by a smoke detection system installed in the same room or area as the ceiling radiation damper.

3. A static ceiling radiation damper shall be permitted to be installed in a room where an occupant sensor is provided within the room that will shut down the system.

Static fire dampers may not operate properly under dynamic conditions. Therefore, fire dampers used in systems designed with dynamic airflow must be tested and labeled for closure under the anticipated airflow and pressure conditions.

At the time that this text was revised, there were no dynamic-rated ceiling radiation dampers (CRDs) in the marketplace. If a CRD is required in a floor/celling assembly, the only choice is to utilize a static damper since no dynamic dampers are available. Under a static system, there can be no air movement within the duct once the system is shut down. So, unless a system is designed to shut down with activation of a smoke detector or other detection device, a static damper cannot be used unless the entire system is designed to shut down upon activation of an initiation device.

The exceptions for this provision clarify the limits of using static systems.

Exception 1, where a static ceiling radiation damper is installed at the opening of a duct, requires that a smoke detector be installed inside the duct or outside the duct with sampling tubes protruding into the duct. The detector or tubes within the duct shall be within 1500 mm mm of the damper. Air outlets and inlets shall not be located between the detector or tubes and the damper. The detector shall be listed for the air velocity, temperature and humidity anticipated at the point where it is installed. Other than in mechanical smoke control systems, dampers shall be closed upon fan shutdown where local smoke detectors require a minimum velocity to operate.

Exception 2, where a static ceiling radiation damper is installed in a ceiling, permits the ceiling radiation damper to be controlled by a smoke detection system installed within the same room or area as the ceiling radiation damper.

Exception 3 permits a static ceiling radiation damper to be installed within a room where an occupant sensor is provided within the room that will shut down the down the system.

717.6.3 Nonfire-resistance-rated floor assemblies. Duct systems constructed of approved materials in accordance with SBC 501 that penetrate non-fire-resistance-rated floor assemblies shall be protected by any of the following methods:

1 A shaft enclosure in accordance with Section 713.

2 The duct connects not more than two stories, and the annular space around the penetrating duct is protected with an approved non-combustible material that resists the free passage of flame and the products of combustion.

3 In floor assemblies composed of non-combustible materials, a shaft shall not be required where the duct connects not more than three stories, the annular space around the penetrating duct is protected with an approved non-combustible material that resists the free passage of flame and the products of combustion and a fire damper is installed at each floor line.

Exception: Fire dampers are not required in ducts within individual residential dwelling units.

Floor assemblies that are not rated still require isolation in some form based on the requirements of Section 717.6.3 where duct systems penetrate the assemblies. Three conditions or requirements are listed.

First, the ducts can be part of a shaft enclosure in accordance with Section 713. The shaft construction required in Section 713.4 would be at least 1 hour.

Second, duct systems that connect not more than two stories (penetrate one floor) are permitted, provided the annular space around the duct is sealed with a noncombustible material that will not allow free passage of flame or smoke. The two-story arrangement does not require a rated damper [see Commentary Figure 717.6.3(1)].

Third, when air ducts connect three levels or less and thus penetrate two floors or less, fire dampers must be provided at each floor line. A  \( 1\frac{1}{2} \) -hour-rated fire damper (see Table 717.3.2.1) is required even though the floor is not required to have a fire-resistance rating [see Commentary Figure 717.6.3(2)]. Fire dampers, unlike door opening protectives with multiple ratings, are only rated for  \( 1\frac{1}{2} \) or 3 hours. Note that this method is limited to floor assemblies of noncombustible construction.

717.7 Flexible ducts and air connectors. Flexible ducts and air connectors shall not pass through any fire-resistance-rated assembly. Flexible air connectors shall not pass through any wall, floor or ceiling.

Flexible air ducts are prohibited from penetrating fire-resistance-rated assemblies.

===== Page 0632 =====
Flexible air connectors are not permitted to pass through any wall, floor or ceiling (fire-resistance rated or not). An inadequate seal at the assembly penetration could allow smoke or flame to penetrate the assembly. Flexible air ducts and connectors can be constructed of both combustible and noncombustible components; therefore, the duct's resistance to the passage of fire could be less than the resistance of the penetrated assembly. All construction assemblies, whether fire-resistance rated or not, provide some inherent resistance to the spread of fire.

## SECTION 718 CONCEALED SPACES

718.1 General. Fireblocking and draftstopping shall be installed in combustible concealed locations in accordance with this section. Fireblocking shall comply with Section 718.2. Draftstopping in floor/ceiling spaces and attic spaces shall comply with Sections 718.3 and 718.4, respectively. The permitted use of combustible materials in concealed spaces of buildings of Type I or II construction shall be limited to the applications indicated in Section 718.5.

The key words in this section are “combustible concealed spaces.” This section does not apply to noncombustible construction. During a fire, flame, smoke and gases will spread via the paths of least resistance. Certain assemblies create void spaces, which will not only affect the spread of fire but, since the voids are concealed, will also make access for suppression more difficult.

The code has established two means by which fire spread within void spaces can be controlled: fireblocking and draftstopping. Fireblocking involves the use of building materials to prevent the movement of flame and gases to other areas through concealed spaces. Draftstopping involves the use of building materials to prevent the movement of air, smoke, gases and flames to other areas through large, concealed spaces. For example, the protection in an attic space is draftstopping, while the protection in the cavity of a wall assembly is fireblocking.

Sections 718.2 addresses where fireblocking is required. Section 718.2.1 identifies the materials that are acceptable for use as fireblocks. Required locations for draftstopping in floor/ceiling spaces and attic spaces are addressed in Sections 718.3 and 718.4, respectively. Section 718.3.1 specifies the acceptable materials for draftstops.

Fireblocks and draft stops are to be installed in combustible concealed spaces to prevent the spread of flame, smoke and gases. If a fire condition exists in a concealed space, the fireblocks and draft stops will help contain the fire until it can be suppressed. This section also includes provisions for permitted combustibles in concealed spaces in buildings of Type I and II construction (see Section 718.5 and Section 603.1, Exceptions 1 through 27).

718.2 Fireblocking. In combustible construction, fireblocking shall be installed to cut off concealed draft openings (both vertical and horizontal) and shall form an effective barrier between floors, between a top story and a roof or attic space. Fireblocking shall be installed in the locations specified in Sections 718.2.2 through 718.2.7.

This Section merely states the goals associated with fireblocking. Fireblocking is intended to reduce the ability of fire, smoke and gases from moving to different parts of the building through combustible concealed spaces. Since there are no test standards for fireblocking, as with firestopping materials, the requirements are prescriptive.

718.2.1 Fireblocking materials. Fireblocking shall consist of the following materials:

1 Fifty-millimeter nominal lumber.

2 Two thicknesses of 25 mm nominal lumber with broken lap joints.

3 One thickness of 18 mm wood structural panels with joints backed by 18 mm wood structural panels.

4 One thickness of 20 mm particleboard with joints backed by 20 mm particleboard.

5 12.5 mm gypsum board.

6 6 mm cement-based millboard.

7 Batts or blankets of mineral wool, mineral fiber or other approved materials installed in such a manner as to be securely retained in place.

8 Cellulose insulation tested in the form and manner intended for use to demonstrate its ability to remain in place and to retard the spread of fire and hot gases.

9 Mass timber complying with Section 2304.11.

The items on this approved list of fireblocking materials have not been tested for fire resistance but are simply deemed as acceptable materials for slowing the spread of flame and products of combustion. Their effectiveness depends on their correct installation, something which must be inspected at the time of construction.

Various insulation materials have been evaluated for use as fireblocking and have been shown to perform well if installed in accordance with their specifications. For insulating material to function well as fireblocking, it must completely fill the area

===== Page 0633 =====
where fireblocking is required so that no unblocked passages exist.

Certain insulating materials have been evaluated for use as fireblocks. The evaluation reports that specify the configuration and attachment for the insulating materials in the construction assemblies are based on tests performed on the assemblies. Although the code does not specify a test standard for fireblocking, these materials have been tested using the ASTM E119 or UL 263 standard and their performance during the test is compared to the performance of other conventional fireblocking material. No rigid materials such as mineral wool, mineral fiber and fiber glass batt or blankets have somewhat limited applications. See Sections 718.2.1.1 and 718.2.1.2 for the limits on these materials. A new material has joined the list as possible fireblocking material cellulose insulation. The code requires cellulose insulation to be tested for the specific application as fireblocking. Just because a space is filled with cellulose insulation does not guarantee that fireblocking will be accomplished.

Item 9 recognizes mass timber as a suitable fireblocking material. The list of acceptable materials includes nominal lumber; therefore, since mass timber (e.g., sawn, glued-laminated and cross-laminated timbers) are of greater mass, mass timber was determined equal or exceed nominal lumber in terms of blocking resistance to reduce the ability of fire, smoke and gases from moving to different part of the building through combustible concealed spaces.

718.2.1.1 Batts or blankets of mineral wool or mineral fiber. Batts or blankets of mineral wool or mineral fiber or other approved nonrigid materials shall be permitted for compliance with the 3000 mm horizontal fireblocking in walls constructed using parallel rows of studs or staggered studs.

The use of mineral wool, mineral fiber or other approved nonrigid material is allowed to fulfill the requirement for fireblocking in the horizontal cavities formed by parallel rows of studs or staggered studs. Some type of fireblocking is required at 3000 mm intervals measured horizontally by Section 718.2.2. The code allows these types of batts or blankets, but the installation details must be approved and inspected in the field to verify that all concealed spaces are effectively fireblocked at the required locations. Simply because a space is filled with insulation does not guarantee that fireblocking will be accomplished.

718.2.1.2 Unfaced fiberglass. Unfaced fiberglass batt insulation used as fireblocking shall fill the entire cross section of the wall cavity to a minimum height of 400 mm measured vertically. Where piping, conduit or similar obstructions are encountered, the insulation shall be packed tightly around the obstruction.

Unfaced fiberglass is a batt insulation that can be used as fireblocking where installed as described in this section. For fiberglass batt insulation to be effective it must fill the wall cavity at the location being fire-blocked, not necessarily the full height of the wall. It must be a minimum of 400 mm vertically since it is assumed that this application is to prevent vertical spread of fire.

718.2.1.3 Loose-fill insulation material. Loose-fill insulation material, insulating foam sealants and caulk materials shall not be used as a fireblock unless specifically tested in the form and manner intended for use to demonstrate its ability to remain in place and to retard the spread of fire and hot gases.

Loose-fill insulation materials are generally not suitable for use as fireblocking because, by their very nature, they are not intended to span an open gap and serve the purpose intended for fireblocking. However, the code does allow for the possibility that some types of materials with some cohesiveness might work; therefore, the code would require testing. This should be full-scale testing using a fire generated in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263.

718.2.1.4 Fireblocking integrity. The integrity of fireblocks shall be maintained.

The continued integrity of the fireblocking over time is necessary to ensure that it is in place at the time a fire occurs. Some of these materials over time, with repair work or remodeling work being done, will be removed, have holes put in the material or be subject to other activity that will make the material ineffective as a fireblock.

718.2.1.5 Double stud walls. Batts or blankets of mineral or glass fiber or other approved nonrigid materials shall be allowed as fireblocking in walls constructed using parallel rows of studs or staggered studs.

The fireblocking at horizontal intervals of 3000 mm or less in the cavities of double stud or staggered stud walls may be fiberglass, mineral fiber or other approved nonrigid materials (see commentary, Section 718.2.1.1).

718.2.2 Concealed wall spaces. Fireblocking shall be provided in concealed spaces of stud walls and partitions, including furred spaces, and parallel rows of studs or staggered studs, as follows:

1 Vertically at the ceiling and floor levels.

2 Horizontally at intervals not exceeding 3000 mm.

===== Page 0634 =====
This Section is intended to prevent the spread of fires within walls. Losses in this area have been seen in existing structures of balloon construction, but the requirements apply to platform framing as well. This Section requires both vertical and horizontal blocking. Vertical blocking simply requires fireblocking in vertical wall cavities at floors and ceilings. Therefore, a tall warehouse-type building may not need any vertical fireblocking. Horizontal blocking, however, would be required every 3000 mm. Section 718.2.1 provides the various methods for fireblocking.

718.2.3 Connections between horizontal and vertical spaces. Fireblocking shall be provided at interconnections between concealed vertical stud wall or partition spaces and concealed horizontal spaces created by an assembly of floor joists or trusses, and between concealed vertical and horizontal spaces such as occur at soffits, drop ceilings, cove ceilings and similar locations.

To prevent fire and smoke from spreading between vertical and horizontal spaces, fireblocks are required [see Commentary Figure 718.2.3(1), Figure 718.2.3(2), and Figure 718.2.3(3)]. If not provided, a concealed fire could spread through-out the floor level because of the interconnection of concealed combustible wall and ceiling spaces.

In platform framing, where gypsum wallboard is continued to the top plate of the wall, typically either the gypsum board or the top plate will serve to cut off the connection between the vertical and horizontal construction. Therefore, with many typical details, no additional fireblocking is needed at this location.

718.2.4 Stairways. Fireblocking shall be provided in concealed spaces between stair stringers at the top and bottom of the run. Enclosed spaces under stairways shall comply with Section 1011.7.3.

Fireblocks are required at the top and bottom of concealed spaces between stair stringers (see Commentary Figure 718.2.4). Similar to fireblocks between horizontal and vertical spaces, fireblocks at the top and bottom of a run will provide a barrier between the floor below the stair and the floor that the stairway serves. Additionally, a reference is made to Section 1011.7.3, which requires the interior of the space under stairways to be protected by 1-hour fire-resistant-rated construction or the fire-resistance rating of the stairway enclosure (whichever is greater).

718.2.5 Ceiling and floor openings. Where required by Section 712.1.8, Exception 1 of Section 714.5.1.2 or Section 714.6, fireblocking of the annular space around vents, pipes, ducts, chimneys and fireplaces at ceilings and floor levels shall be installed with a material specifically tested in the form and manner intended for use to demonstrate its ability to remain in place and resist the free passage of flame and the products of combustion.

Sections 712.1.8 and 714.4 allow penetrations of ceilings and floors to be fireblocked [see Figure 714.5.1(1) and Figure 714.5.2(2)]. It should be noted that depending on the type of penetration and the number of floors penetrated (or stories connected), a shaft may be required (see Sections 712 and 713).

718.2.5.1 Factory-built chimneys and fireplaces. Factory-built chimneys and fireplaces shall be fireblocked in accordance with UL 103 and UL 127.

UL 103 and 127 specify that only metal fireblocks and insulation shields are to be used with factory-built chimneys and fireplaces. SBC 501 contains a reference similar to that made in the UL standards. Where fire-resistance-rated floor/celling assemblies are penetrated, the higher degree of protection afforded by tested through-penetration protection systems is required.

718.2.6 Exterior wall coverings. Fireblocking shall be installed within concealed spaces of exterior wall coverings and other exterior architectural elements where permitted to be of combustible construction as specified in Section 1405 or where erected with combustible frames. Fireblocking shall be installed at maximum intervals of 6000 mm in either dimension so that there will be no concealed space exceeding 9 m \( ^{2} \)  between fireblocking. Where wood furnishing strips are used, they shall be of approved wood of natural decay resistance or preservative-treated wood. If noncontinuous, such elements shall have closed ends, with not less than 100 mm of separation between sections.

Exceptions:

1. Fireblocking of cornices is not required in single-family dwellings. Fireblocking of cornices of a two-family dwelling is required only at the line of dwelling unit separation.

2. Fireblocking shall not be required where the exterior wall covering is installed on noncombustible framing and the face of the exterior wall covering exposed to the concealed space is covered by one of the following materials:

2.1. Aluminum having a minimum thickness of 0.5 mm.

2.2. Corrosion-resistant steel having a base metal thickness not less than 0.4 mm at any point.

===== Page 0635 =====
2.3. Other approved noncombustible materials.

3. Fireblocking shall not be required where the exterior wall covering has been tested in accordance with, and complies with the acceptance criteria of NFPA 285. The exterior wall covering shall be installed as tested in accordance with NFPA 285.

Combustible exterior wall finish and exterior architectural elements are required to be fireblocked at a maximum of 6000 mm intervals and a 9 m²) maximum area to prevent the spread of fire or smoke through concealed spaces. Adjacent sections of exterior trim need not be considered as contributing to the 6000 mm limitation if there is a minimum 100 mm separation between sections of exterior trim and the ends are closed. Trim on the building exterior presents the same concern as interior combustible concealed wall spaces and, therefore, requires fireblocking. To increase the long-term durability of wood used on the exterior, a certain level of decay resistance is required.

Exception 1 exempts single-family dwellings from the fireblocking requirement in the eaves or cornices.

Exception 2 exempts aluminum or steel siding installed over noncombustible wall framing. Exception 3 exempts exterior wall coverings that have been tested and comply with NFPA 285, provided the coverings are installed in accordance with the listing. This exception is compatible to the metal composite material (MCM) wall coverings in Section 1407. Section 1406.10.3 also requires the NFPA 285 test.

718.2.7 Concealed sleeper spaces. Where wood sleepers are used for laying wood flooring on masonry or concrete fire-resistance-rated floors, the space between the floor slab and the underside of the wood flooring shall be filled with an approved material to resist the free passage of flame and products of combustion or fireblocked in such a manner that open spaces under the flooring shall not exceed 9 m² in area and such space shall be filled solidly under permanent partitions so that communication under the flooring between adjoining rooms shall not occur.

Exceptions:

1. Fireblocking is not required for slab-on-grade floors in gymnasiums.

2. Fireblocking is required only at the juncture of each alternate lane and at the ends of each lane in a bowling facility.

Concealed spaces created by floor sleepers must be fireblocked into areas no greater than 9 m² or such spaces must be filled with materials capable of resisting flame, smoke or gases (see Commentary Figure 718.2.7).
Since floor sleepers may cover large areas, this fireblock or material will restrict a fire from spreading within the concealed space to other areas of the floor. This section is commonly applied where a raised, wood-finished floor surface is installed in Type I or II construction.

718.3 Draftstopping in floors. Draftstopping shall be installed to subdivide floor/ceiling assemblies where required by Section 708.4.2. In other than Group R occupancies, draftstopping shall also be installed to subdivide combustible floor/ceiling assemblies so that horizontal floor areas do not exceed 100 m².
Exception: Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

Draftstopping subdivides combustible concealed horizontal spaces, unlike firestopping, which subdivides vertical spaces. In all occupancies, draftstopping is required in combustible concealed floor construction in the locations required by Section 708.4.2. See the commentary to Section 708.4.2 for more information. In all occupancies other than Group R, additional draftstopping is required. Draftstopping is to be provided such that the concealed combustible floor/ceiling space is subdivided into horizontal spaces not exceeding 100 m² (see Commentary Figure 718.3). The exception to these requirements is if the building is sprinkled throughout with an NFPA 13 system.

718.3.1 Draftstopping materials. Draftstopping materials shall be not less than 12.5 mm gypsum board, 10 mm wood structural panel, 10 mm particleboard, 25-mm nominal lumber, cement fiberboard, bats or blankets of mineral wool or glass fiber, or other approved materials adequately supported. The integrity of draftstops shall be maintained.

Similar to fireblocks in small, concealed spaces, draft-stops also act as a barrier to smoke and gases. Because of the large areas that require this barrier, the code permits certain types of sheathing material such as 12.5 mm gypsum board, 10 mm plywood and particleboard, 25 mm nominal lumber, cement fiberboard, mineral wool and glass fiber bats or blankets, or other approved materials. The draftstop material must be properly supported and capable of remaining in place when subjected to initial fire exposure. It is reasonable to assume that materials that are acceptable for fireblocking purposes (see Section 718.2.1) would perform as well for

===== Page 0636 =====
draftstopping situations, so many items are duplicated here. Although the code provides an extensive laundry list of accepted materials, it is important to note that the code allows the use of any other approved material that is adequately supported. Glass and mineral fiber bats are mentioned as an approved draftstopping material. Since the nonrigid glass or mineral fiber bats are not for insulation, they should be compressed to ensure that the void is completely filled. Batts used for insulation cannot be compressed.

718.4 Draftstopping in attics. Draftstopping shall be installed to subdivide attic spaces where required by Section 708.4.2. In other than Group R occupancies, draftstopping shall also be installed to subdivide combustible attic spaces and combustible concealed roof spaces such that any horizontal area does not exceed 280 m². Ventilation of concealed roof spaces shall be maintained in accordance with 1202.2.1.

Exception: Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

Fires that spread to attics that are not properly draftstopped often cause considerable damage. For this reason, draftstopping is required in attic and concealed roof spaces in accordance with 708.4.2. Since nonresidential buildings are not always subdivided into small tenant spaces, concealed roof spaces and attics are to be subdivided into areas not exceeding 280 m². The exception indicates that draftstopping is not required where the spaces above and below the ceiling are provided coverage by an automatic sprinkler system, in accordance with NFPA 13. The text also reminds the code user that, although the space must be compartmented, it still must be ventilated in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 12 in order to eliminate moisture or condensation or to cool the attic.

718.4.1 Draftstopping materials. Materials utilized for draftstopping of attic spaces shall comply with Section 718.3.1.

See the commentary to Section 718.3.1.

718.4.1.1 Openings. Openings in the partitions shall be protected by self-closing doors with automatic latches constructed as required for the partitions.

Section 1209.2 requires attic access. The placement of draftstopping in the attic may interfere with the ability of the fire department to gain access to all attic spaces. This section requires that if draftstopping is provided with access openings to adjacent draft-stopped portions of the attic, the openings must be constructed of draftstopping materials and be equipped with self-closing mechanisms in order to ensure that the draft stop will perform its intended function.

718.5 Combustible materials in concealed spaces in Type I or II construction. Combustible materials shall not be permitted in concealed spaces of buildings of Type I or II construction.

Exceptions:

1. Combustible materials in accordance with Section 603.

2. Combustible materials exposed within plenums complying with Section 602 of SBC 501.

3. Class A interior finish materials classified in accordance with Section 803.

4. Combustible piping within partitions or shaft enclosures installed in accordance with the provisions of this code.

5. Combustible piping within concealed ceiling spaces installed in accordance with SBC 501 and SBC 701.

6. Combustible insulation and covering on pipe and tubing, installed in concealed spaces other than plenums, complying with Section 720.7.

This section is necessary because Section 718 would generally exclude Type I and II buildings from the concealed space draftstopping and fireblocking provisions. The use of combustibles in nonstructural applications is limited to the listed exceptions to prevent fire spread within building elements. The severity of a potential problem increases when combustibles are located within concealed spaces that are inaccessible to manual firefighting. This section regulates the use of combustibles within concealed spaces of noncombustible buildings. This section is referenced from Exception 24 of Section 603.1

## SECTION 719 FIRE-RESISTANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR PLASTER

719.1 Thickness of plaster. The minimum thickness of gypsum plaster or Portland cement plaster used in a fire-resistance-rated system shall be determined by the prescribed fire tests. The plaster thickness shall be measured from the face of the lath where applied to gypsum lath or metal lath.

The fire resistance of plaster is dependent on material variations, such as the aggregate mixture (sand content) as well as bonding to the plaster base. The use of wire or wire fabric reinforces the plaster mixes applied to plaster bases and, therefore, ensures increased fire resistance. As such, the makeup of the plastered element is required when evaluating the fire-resistance rating of plaster. Because

===== Page 0637 =====
the type of plaster used affects the fire-resistance rating, it is essential that the tests conducted utilize a plaster mix similar to that which is to be used in actual construction. Depending on the type of plaster, additional tests may not be required. If the plaster is a type that is judged to be equivalent to a tested type (see Section 719.2), additional testing is not required.

It is the thickness of the protective covering that is important. Therefore, the plaster is to be measured from the face of the lath, which reinforces the plaster.

Code users should also be aware that Sections 721 and 722 contain a number of items related to the use of plaster in fire-resistance ratings. Section 720 contains a number of prescriptive assemblies that can be used to obtain a fire-resistance rating. Section 721 contains methods of calculating fire-resistant assemblies and the contribution of plaster to other assemblies. For more information, see Sections 722.2.1.4, 722.3.2 and 722.4.1. Although many people are not familiar with these provisions, they are permitted under Sections 703.2.2 and 703.2.3 and provide another option for establishing rated assemblies.

719.2 Plaster equivalents. For fire-resistance purposes, 12.5 mm of unsanded gypsum plaster shall be deemed equivalent to 20 mm of one-to-three gypsum sand plaster or 25 mm of Portland cement sand plaster.

This section indicates that prescribed thicknesses of unsanded gypsum plaster, one-to-three sanded gypsum plaster and Portland cement sand plaster are considered equivalent in terms of their fire-resistance rating characteristics. Once tests are conducted to determine the fire resistance of an assembly using one of these types, equivalency to the other prescribed types can be determined without subsequent tests.

719.3 Noncombustible furnring. In buildings of Types I and II construction, plaster shall be applied directly on concrete or masonry or on approved noncombustible plastering base and furnring.

* Buildings of Types I and II construction are required to be predominantly of noncombustible construction. This Section requires the plastering base and furnring to be noncombustible. This provision is intended to prohibit a combustible cavity behind the finished plaster, which may be an area for a concealed fire buildup.

719.4 Double reinforcement. Plaster protection more than 25 mm in thickness shall be reinforced with an additional layer of approved lath embedded not less than 20 mm from the outer surface and fixed securely in place.

Exception: Solid plaster partitions or where otherwise determined by fire tests.

The additional reinforcement is intended to decrease the likelihood of the plaster loosening when subjected to high temperatures. The plaster relies on the lath to provide a finish that is structurally sound. As the thickness of the plaster increases, additional reinforcement is required to hold the plaster in place.

719.5 Plaster alternatives for concrete. In reinforced concrete construction, gypsum plaster or Portland cement plaster is permitted to be substituted for 12.5 mm of the required poured concrete protection, except that a minimum thickness of 10 mm of poured concrete shall be provided in reinforced concrete floors and 25 mm in reinforced concrete columns in addition to the plaster finish. The concrete base shall be prepared in accordance with 2510.7.

* Concrete elements, such as reinforced slabs and columns, rely in part on the thickness of the element to provide a fire-resistance rating. In order to reduce the concrete thickness, this section permits up to 12.5 mm of plaster to be substituted for 12.5 mm of concrete without affecting the fire-resistance rating of the element. While plaster can be substituted for concrete for fire-resistance purposes, a minimum amount of concrete is still required to be provided for structural integrity.

## SECTION 720 THERMAL- AND SOUND-INSULATING MATERIALS

720.1 General. Insulating materials shall comply with the requirements of this section. Where a flame spread index or a smoke-developed index is specified in this section, such index shall be determined in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Any material that is subject to an increase in flame spread index or smoke-developed index beyond the limits herein established through the effects of age, moisture or other atmospheric conditions shall not be permitted. Insulating materials, when tested in accordance with the requirements of this section, shall include facings, when used, such as vapor retarders, vapor permeable membranes and similar coverings, and all layers of single and multilayer reflective foil insulation and similar materials.

Exceptions:

1. Fiberboard insulation shall comply with Chapter 23.

2. Foam plastic insulation shall comply with Chapter 26.

===== Page 0638 =====
3. Duct and pipe insulation and duct and pipe coverings and linings in plenums shall comply with SBC 501.

4. All layers of single and multilayer reflective plastic core insulation shall comply with Section 2614.

This Section addresses the potential fire or flame spread hazards of insulating materials installed in building spaces. Other provisions of the code or companion codes regulate insulating materials used for duct and plenum insulation [see SBC 501 for energy conservation purposes and the International Energy Conservation Code \( ^{®} \)  (IECC \( ^{®} \) )/(or its equivalent in SBC 601/SBC 602) and foam plastic insulation (see Section 2603). Insulating materials can affect fire development and fire spread and are, therefore, regulated accordingly.

This Section addresses the various insulating materials that may be installed in building spaces, including insulating batts, blankets, fills (including vapor barriers and vapor-permeable membranes) or other coverings. Fiberboard insulation is regulated by Chapter 23. Cellulose loose-fill insulation is regulated by Section 720.6. Foam plastic insulation is regulated by Chapter 26. The applicable test method is ASTM E84 or UL 723 (see commentary, Section 803.1).

The requirements of Section 703.2 regarding the potential that adding items into a fire-resistant assembly may reduce the rating of the tested assembly must be considered. The addition of insulation has the potential to either add to or reduce the fire-resistance rating of an assembly. The reduction of ratings is more of a problem where insulation is added into a horizontal assembly.

720.2 Concealed installation. Insulating materials, where concealed as installed in buildings of any type of construction, shall have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450.

Exception: Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation complying with the requirements of Section 720.6 shall not be required to meet a flame spread index requirement but shall be required to meet a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 when tested in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2.

Concealed insulation no longer acts as an interior finish unless the covering material is removed or the fire is in the concealed building space. To limit the contribution of the insulation to a fire condition, the material must have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450. This is illustrated in Commentary Figure 720.2. Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation is regulated by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC), in accordance with Section 720.6. These materials are exempt from the flame spread index requirements but still must be tested for smoke development in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2. Spray-applied cellulose is regulated by Section 720.3.1 (see commentary, Section 720.4).
720.2.1 Facions. Where such materials are installed in concealed spaces in buildings of Types III, IV or V construction, the flame spread, and smoke-developed limitations do not apply to facings, coverings, and layers of reflective foil insulation that are installed behind and in substantial contact with the unexposed surface of the ceiling, wall or floor finish.

Exception: All layers of single and multilayer reflective plastic core insulation shall comply with Section 2614.

In buildings of Types III, IV and V construction, the flame spread indices do not apply to facing material, provided it is installed behind (and in substantial contact with) the unexposed surface of the ceiling, floor or wall finish. For example, where paper-backed insulation is placed directly on top of a ceiling, the paper facing is not required to meet the flame spread index; however, if the same material is applied to the underside of a roof deck and the paper facing is exposed to the attic space, the paper facing must meet the flame spread criteria. The potential for flame spread is greatly diminished where the facings are installed in direct contact with the finish material because of the lack of airspace to support a fire if it were to be exposed to a source of ignition.

The purpose of the vapor retarder being placed on the warm-in-winter side of the building element is to prevent moisture vapor in the warm interior from reaching the dew-point temperature on a cold surface in the roof, wall or floor system. The generally accepted rating of a vapor retarder is 1 perm  \( [57\ \text{mg}/(\text{s} \times \text{m}^2 \times \text{Pa})] \) . It is assumed that the permeance of an adequate vapor barrier will not exceed 1 perm  \( [57\ \text{mg}/(\text{s} \times \text{m}^2 \times \text{Pa})] \)  (see commentary, Section 1202.2).

720.3 Exposed installation. Insulating materials, where exposed as installed in buildings of any type of construction, shall have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450.

Exception: Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation complying with the

===== Page 0639 =====
requirements of Section 720.6 shall not be required to meet a flame spread index requirement but shall be required to meet a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 when tested in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2.

Exposed insulating materials represent the same fire exposure hazard as any other exposed material, such as interior finish. The flame spread index for all applications of insulation materials is limited to 25, compared to 200 for interior finishes installed in rooms or spaces of certain occupancies (see commentary, Chapter 8). As with all interior finishes, the smoke-developed index is limited to 450. Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation is regulated by the CPSC in accordance with Section 720.6. These materials are exempt from the flame spread index requirements but still need to be tested for smoke development in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2. Spray-applied cellulosic fiber is regulated by Section 720.3.1 (see commentary, Section 720.4). It is important to remember that insulation materials that are open and exposed within an attic or crawl space are still considered as being "exposed" and, therefore, regulated by this section. The general requirements of this section do not differ from the pro-visions of Section 720.1. The main difference is that the facing materials within concealed installations may be exempt from the flame spread and smoke-developed rating (see Section 720.2.1) while the exposed facings would be limited as stated in this section.

720.3.1 Attic floors. Exposed insulation materials installed on attic floors shall have a critical radiant flux of not less than 1200 watt per square meter when tested in accordance with ASTM E 970.

ASTM E970 is a test method that was developed by the insulation industry to evaluate the fire hazard of exposed attic insulation and is referenced in the material standards for insulation. Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation is required to comply with CPSC 16 CFR, Part 1209 (see Section 720.6), which requires testing by this method. Spray-applied cellulose insulation that is not subject to the CPSC standard is also subject to the ASTM E970 testing by virtue of this section.

720.4 Loose-fill insulation. Loose-fill insulation materials that cannot be mounted in the ASTM E 84 or UL 723 apparatus without a screen or artificial supports shall comply with the flame spread and smoke-developed limits of Sections 720.2 and 720.3 when tested in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2.
Exception: Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation shall not be required to meet a flame spread index requirement when tested in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2, provided that such insulation has a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 and complies with the requirements of Section 720.6.

The exception serves to make a distinction between cellulose insulation, which is spray applied using a water-mist applicator, and cellulose or other loose-fill insulation, which is poured or blown in place. Spray-applied cellulose insulation can be exposed on vertical and horizontal ceiling-type surfaces, so it is treated as any other insulating material in regard to testing. Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation, which is poured or blown in, is regulated by CPSC requirements (see Section 720.6) and is exempt from the test procedure described in this section. These materials are exempt from the flame spread index requirements but still need to be tested for smoke development in accordance with CAN/ULC S102.2.

720.5 Roof insulation. The use of combustible roof insulation not complying with Sections 720.2 and 720.3 shall be permitted in any type of construction provided that insulation is covered with approved roof coverings directly applied thereto.

Foam plastic roof insulation is required to comply with Chapter 26. This section allows combustible insulation other than foam plastic insulation to be incorporated in the roof assembly without declassifying the type of construction. This provision coordinates with Section 603.1, Item 4.

720.6 Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation and self-supported spray-applied cellulosic insulation. Cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation and self-supported spray-applied cellulosic insulation shall comply with CPSC 16 CFR Parts 1209 and 1404. Each package of such insulating material shall be clearly labeled in accordance with CPSC 16 CFR Parts 1209 and 1404.

CPSC 16 CFR, Parts 1209 and 1404, contain various requirements that regulate the product to avoid excessive flammability or significant fire hazards. The smoke-developed index for cellulosic fiber loose-fill insulation must be determined by the ASTM E84 test and must be 450 or less. This Section is intended to ensure that the smoke-developed index is not determined by the test procedures specified in Section 720.4.

720.7 Insulation and covering on pipe and tubing. Insulation and covering on pipe and tubing

===== Page 0640 =====
shall have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450.

Exception: Insulation and covering on pipe and tubing installed in plenums shall comply with SBC 501.

This section maintains the general provision for insulation by requiring a maximum flame spread of 25 and a smoke-developed index of 450, as stated in Sections 720.2 and 720.3; however, if exposed in a plenum, SBC 501 limits the smoke-developed index to 50.

## SECTION 721 PRESCRIPTIVE FIRE RESISTANCE

721.1 General. The provisions of this section contain prescriptive details of fire-resistance-rated building elements, components or assemblies. The materials of construction listed in Table 721.1(1), Table 721.1(2), and Table 721.1(3) shall be assumed to have the fire-resistance ratings prescribed therein. Where materials that change the capacity for heat dissipation are incorporated into a fire-resistance-rated assembly, fire test results or other substantiating data shall be made available to the building official to show that the required fire-resistance rating time period is not reduced.

Section 703.2.2 permits the fire-resistance ratings to be determined in a number of ways, including those found in Section 721 (see Section 703.2.2, Item 2). In this section, there are many prescriptive details for fire-resistance-rated construction, particularly those materials and assemblies listed in Table 721.1(1) for structural parts, Table 721.1(2) for walls and partitions and Table 721.1(3) for floor and roof systems. For the most part, the listed items have been tested in accordance with the fire-resistance ratings indicated. In addition, a similar footnote to all of the tables allows the acceptance of generic assemblies that are listed in GA 600, Fire-Resistance Design Manual. It is important to review all of the applicable footnotes where using a material or assembly from one of the tables.

As stated above, the fire-resistance ratings for the walls and partitions outlined in Table 721.1(2) are based on actual tests. For reinforced concrete walls, it is important to note the type of aggregate used. The difference in aggregates is quite significant for a 4-hour fire-resistance-rated wall, as it amounts to a difference in thickness of almost 50 mm. For hollow-unit masonry walls, the thickness required for a particular fire-endurance rating is the equivalent thickness as defined in Section 722.3.1 for concrete masonry and Section 722.4.1.1 for clay masonry.

Table 721.1(3) provides fire-resistance ratings for floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling assemblies. Note n, which exempts unusable space from the flooring and ceiling requirements, is especially important. This exemption is consistent with Section 711.2.6.

Often, materials such as insulation are added to fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The code requires substantiating fire test data to show that when the materials are added, they do not reduce the required fire-endurance time period. As an example, adding insulation to a floor/ceiling assembly may change its capacity to dissipate heat and, particularly for noncombustible assemblies, the fire-resistance rating may be changed.

Although the provision is intended primarily to cover those cases where thermal insulation is added, the language is intentionally broad so that it applies to any material that might be added to the assembly.

An example of the minimum thickness of concrete required for a structural steel column is shown in Commentary Figure 721.1.1(1). As shown, this figure depicts Item 1-1.5 of Table 721.1(1). Commentary Figure 721.1.1(2) depicts a reinforced concrete column based on Item 5-1.1 (see commentary, Section 721.1).

An example of the minimum thickness of concrete required for a wall is shown in Commentary FIGURE 721.1(2)(A). As shown, this figure depicts Item 4-1.1 of Table 721.1(2). Commentary FIGURE 721.1(2)(B) depicts a noncombustible stud exterior wall based on Item 15-1.4 (see commentary, Section 721.1). An example of a 1-hour-rated wood floor or roof truss is shown in Commentary Figure 721.1(3). As shown, this figure depicts Item 21-1.1 (see commentary, Section 721.1).

721.1.1 Thickness of protective coverings. The thickness of fire-resistant materials required for protection of structural members shall be not less than set forth in Table 721.1(1), except as modified in this section. The figures shown shall be the net thickness of the protecting materials and shall not include any hollow space in back of the protection.

In accordance with this section, the required thickness of insulating material used to provide fire resistance to a structural member cannot be less than the dimension established by Table 721.1(1), except for permitted modifications. An example of the minimum thickness of concrete required for a structural steel column is shown in Commentary Figure 721.1.1(1). Commentary Figure 721.1.1(2) illustrates the minimum concrete thickness requirements for protecting reinforcing steel in concrete columns, beams, girders and trusses. Refer to Section 704 for additional provisions regarding structural members.

===== Page 0641 =====
721.1.2 Unit masonry protection. Where required, metal ties shall be embedded in bed joints of unit masonry for protection of steel columns. Such ties shall be as set forth in Table 721.1(1) or be equivalent thereto.

Items 1-3.1 through 1-3.4 of Table 721.1(1) require horizontal joint reinforcement. This section stipulates that if ties are required to connect the masonry to the steel column, such ties are to be located in the bed joints, which is where the horizontal reinforcement is to be located.

721.1.3 Reinforcement for cast-in-place concrete column protection. Cast-in-place concrete protection for steel columns shall be reinforced at the edges of such members with wire ties of not less than 4.5 mm in diameter wound spirally around the columns on a pitch of not more than 200 mm or by equivalent reinforcement.

In order for a concrete-encased steel column to maintain a fire-resistance rating, it is imperative that the concrete remain in place. Similar to a reinforced concrete column with spiral reinforcement (see Section 722.2.4.3), the ties required by this section are necessary for the concrete to remain in place around the column.

721.1.4 Plaster application. The finish coat is not required for plaster protective coatings where those coatings comply with the design mix and thickness requirements of Table 721.1(1), Table 721.1(2) and Table 721.1(3).

The thickness of plaster for prescriptive assemblies, such as Item 1-4.1 in Table 721.1(1), Item 12-1.1 in Table 721.1(2) and Item 11-1.1 in Table 721.1(3), does not include the finish coat. Only the scratch coat and brown coat are needed to achieve the indicated fire-resistance ratings in the tables.

721.1.5 Bonded prestressed concrete tendons. For members having a single tendon or more than one tendon installed with equal concrete cover measured from the nearest surface, the cover shall be not less than that set forth in Table 721.1(1). For members having multiple tendons installed with variable concrete cover, the average tendon cover shall be not less than that set forth in Table 721.1(1), provided that:

1 The clearance from each tendon to the nearest exposed surface is used to determine the average cover.

2 In no case can the clear cover for individual tendons be less than one-half of that set forth in Table 721.1(1). A minimum cover of 20 mm for slabs and 25 mm for beams is required for any aggregate concrete.

3 For the purpose of establishing a fire-resistance rating, tendons having a clear covering less than that set forth in Table 721.1(1) shall not contribute more than 50 percent of the required ultimate moment capacity for members less than 0.23 m \( ^{2} \)  in cross-sectional area and 65 percent for larger members. For structural design purposes, however, tendons having a reduced cover are assumed to be fully effective.

As the ultimate-moment capacity of the member is critical to its behavior under fire conditions, the code requires the reduction for those tendons having cover to be less than that specified by the code. Behavior at service loads, however, is less affected by the heat of a fire; therefore, the code permits those tendons with reduced cover to be fully effective.

## SECTION 722 CALCULATED FIRE RESISTANCE

Due to the prescriptive nature of Section 722, this Section contains explanatory material, examples and reference materials related to calculating fire-resistance ratings of materials and assemblies. As such, commentary is provided where necessary as the basis for a provision or to illustrate the application of the requirement.

This Section provides a number of useful alternatives for establishing compliance with the code. The provisions in this Section can be used to calculate the fire-resistance rating for an assembly (concrete, concrete masonry, clay masonry, steel and wood). It also contains provisions that would permit modifications or changes to a tested assembly. For example, the steel assemblies (see Section 722.5) will allow the selection of different sized or shaped members depending on the weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio (see Sections 722.5.2.1.2 and 722.5.2.2). In addition, the amount of spray-applied fire-resistant materials can be modified from a tested assembly to either increase or decrease the coverage dependent on the member and the sprayapplied material.

The Section also addresses items that are much less exotic and may be helpful in a number of situations. Section 722.6 provides methods for calculating the fire resistance of wood assemblies, including light-framed walls and floors or exposed heavy-timber members. Section 722.4.1 can be used for masonry walls (including existing conditions) where additional protection such as filled cores or an additional wytte such as a brick veneer is added.

While this Section is not often used by many people, those who have used it will find that it is often helpful in solving difficult situations related to the protection of certain assemblies. Therefore, taking the time to become familiar

===== Page 0642 =====
with this Section can be very beneficial. The provisions of this Section include methods for calculating fire resistance as follows:

Concrete Assemblies:
Walls—722.2.1
Floor and roof slabs—722.2.2
Beams—722.2.3
Columns—722.2.4
Concrete Masonry:
Walls—722.3.2
Lintels—722.3.4
Columns—722.3.4
Clay Brick and Tile Masonry:
Walls—722.4.1
Lintels—722.4.3
Columns—722.4.4
Steel Assemblies:
Columns using:
Gypsum wallboard—722.5.1.2
Spray-applied materials—722.5.1.3
Concrete or masonry—722.5.1.4
Beams using:
Spray-applied materials—722.5.2.2
Trusses using:
Spray-applied materials—722.5.2.3
Wood Assemblies:
Walls, floors and roofs—722.6

722.1 General. The provisions of this Section contain procedures by which the fire resistance of specific materials or combinations of materials is established by calculations. These procedures apply only to the information contained in this Section and shall not be otherwise used. The calculated fire resistance of specific materials or combinations of materials shall be established by one of the following:

1 Concrete, concrete masonry and clay masonry assemblies shall be permitted in accordance with ACI 216.1/TMS 0216.

2 Precast and precast, prestressed concrete assemblies shall be permitted in accordance with PCI 124.

3 Steel assemblies shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 5 of ASCE 29.

4 Exposed wood members and wood decking shall be permitted in accordance with Chapter 16 of ANSI/AWC NDS.

Section 703.2 permits fire-resistance ratings to be determined in a number of ways, including those found in Section 722 (see Section 703.2.2, Item 3). The provisions of this Section contain procedures by which the fire resistance of specific materials or combinations of materials is established by calculations. These procedures apply only to the information contained in this Section and are not to be otherwise used. The calculated fire resistance of concrete, concrete masonry and clay masonry assemblies is also permitted in accordance with ACI 216.1/TMS 0216.1 while steel assemblies can use ASCE 29 (see commentary, Section 703.2.2).

722.2 Concrete assemblies. The provisions of this section contain procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of concrete assemblies are established by calculations.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.2.1 Concrete walls. Cast-in-place and precast concrete walls shall comply with Section 722.2.1.1. Multiwythe concrete walls shall comply with Section 722.2.1.2. Joints between precast panels shall comply with Section 722.2.1.3. Concrete walls with gypsum wallboard or plaster finish shall comply with Section 722.2.1.4.

See the commentary to Sections 722.2.1.1, 722.2.1.2, 722.2.1.3 and 722.2.1.4.

722.2.1.1 Cast-in-place or precast walls. The minimum equivalent thicknesses of cast-in-place or precast concrete walls for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours are shown in Table 722.2.1.1. For solid walls with flat vertical surfaces, the equivalent thickness is the same as the actual thickness. The values in Table 722.2.1.1 apply to plain, reinforced or prestressed concrete walls.

Although there have been few fire tests of concrete walls (other than concrete masonry), there have been many fire tests of concrete slabs tested as floors or roofs. Fire tests of floors or roofs are considered to be more severe than those of walls because of the loading conditions (tension cracks associated with bending moment). In addition, most ASTM E119 or UL 263 fire tests of floor assemblies have been conducted while the assembly was supported within restraining frames. As concrete assemblies are heated and expand, the expansion is resisted by the restraining frame. These restraining forces are usually much greater than the superimposed loads supported by load-bearing walls. Thus, floor or roof assemblies are subjected to both vertical superimposed loads and horizontal restraining loads during fire tests. By contrast, load-bearing walls are subjected only to superimposed loads.

The fire endurance of masonry or concrete walls is nearly always governed by the ASTM E119 or UL 263 criteria for temperature rise of the unexposed surface (i.e., the "heat transmission" end point). For flat concrete slabs or panels, the heat transmission fire endurance depends primarily on the aggregate type and thickness and is essentially the same for floors as it is for walls.

The data in Table 722.2.1.1 were derived from Portland Cement Association (PCA) Bulletin

===== Page 0643 =====
223, "Fire Endurances of Concrete Slabs as Influenced by Thickness, Aggregate Type, and Moisture," and PCA Publication T-140, Fire Resistance of Reinforced Concrete Floors.

722.2.1.1.1 Hollow-core precast wall panels. For hollow-core precast concrete wall panels in which the cores are of constant cross section throughout the length, calculation of the equivalent thickness by dividing the net cross-sectional area (the gross cross section minus the area of the cores) of the panel by its width shall be permitted.

The method for determining equivalent thickness of masonry units was developed because the cores in masonry units taper. The method is, of course, also applicable to hollow-core precast concrete panels. However, because the cores in hollow-core panels do not taper, the equivalent thickness can be calculated by dividing the net cross-sectional area of the panel by its width.

722.2.1.1.2 Core spaces filled. Where all of the core spaces of hollow-core wall panels are filled with loose-fill material, such as expanded shale, clay or slag, or vermiculite or perlite, the fire-resistance rating of the wall is the same as that of a solid wall of the same concrete type and of the same overall thickness.

The PCA report “Tests of Fire Resistance and Strength of Walls of Concrete Masonry Units” shows that filling cores of concrete masonry units with loose lightweight aggregates increases the fire endurance to a duration significantly longer than that of solid masonry units of the same total thickness. It is reasonable to assume that the same relationship exists for walls made of hollow-core panels.

722.2.1.1.3 Tapered cross sections. The thickness of panels with tapered cross sections shall be that determined at a distance 2t or 150 mm, whichever is less, from the point of minimum thickness, where t is the minimum thickness.

Some precast concrete wall panel sections (e.g., certain single-tee units) have tapered surfaces so the thickness varies, as shown in Code Figure 722.2.2.1.2. In fire tests, it has been customary to monitor the unexposed surface temperature at the location shown in the figure.

722.2.1.1.4 Ribbed or undulating surfaces. The equivalent thickness of panels with ribbed or undulating surfaces shall be determined by one of the following expressions:

For  \( s \geq 4t \) , the thickness to be used shall be t
For  \( s \leq 2t \) , the thickness to be used shall be  \( t_{a} \)
For  \( 4t > s > 2t \) , the thickness to be used shall be

 \[ t+\left(\frac{4t}{s}-1\right)(t_{e}+t) \quad (7-3) \]

where:

s = Spacing of ribs or undulations.

t = Minimum thickness.

 \( t_{e}= \)  Equivalent thickness of the panel calculated as the net cross-sectional area of the panel divided by the width, in which the maximum thickness used in the calculation shall not exceed 2t.

The portion of a ribbed panel that can be used in calculating equivalent thickness,  \( t_{e} \) , is shown in Code Figure 722.2.2.1.3. Note that the procedure outlined gives no credit for stems of double tees or of similar ribbed panels and clearly indicates that the minimum thickness must be used for such sections.

722.2.1.2 Multiwthe walls. For walls that consist of two wythes of different types of concrete, the fire-resistance ratings shall be permitted to be determined from Figure 722.2.1.2.

The graphs in the Code Figure 722.2.1.2 were derived from a report entitled “Fire endurance of Two-Course Floors and Roofs” in the ACI Journal.

722.2.1.2.1 Two or more wythes. The fire-resistance rating for wall panels consisting of two or more wythes shall be permitted to be determined by the formula:

 \[ R=(R_{1}^{0.59}+R_{2}^{0.59}+\ldots+R_{n}^{0.59},1.7) \quad (7-4) \]

where:

R = The fire endurance of the assembly, minutes.

 \( R_{1} \) ,  \( R_{2} \) , = The fire endurances of the individual and  \( R_{n} \)  wythes, minutes. Values of  \( R_{n}^{0.59} \)  for use in Equation 7-4 are given in Table 722.2.1.2(1). Calculated fire-resistance ratings are shown in Table 722.2.1.2(2).

Equation 7-4 was developed by the U.S. National Bureau of Standards (NBS) in the early 1940s and first appeared in Appendix B of BMS 92. Verification of the accuracy of the equation is given in "Fire Endurance of Two-Course Floors and Roofs" in the ACI Journal. This section and the associated tables allow both the determination of the fire endurance of a particular assembly [see Table 722.2.1.2(1)] and what thickness is required to achieve a certain fire endurance [see Table 722.2.1.2(2)].

722.2.1.2.2 Foam plastic insulation. The fire-resistance ratings of precast concrete wall panels

===== Page 0644 =====
consisting of a layer of foam plastic insulation sandwiched between two wythes of concrete shall be permitted to be determined by use of Equation 7-4. Foam plastic insulation with a total thickness of less than 25 mm shall be disregarded. The  \( R_{n} \)  value for thickness of foam plastic insulation of 25 mm or greater, for use in the calculation, is 5 minutes; therefore  \( R_{n}^{0.59} = 2.5 \) .

This value was for foam plastic insulation 25 mm thick and greater, determined from a fire test conducted on a panel that consisted of a 50 mm base slab of carbonate aggregate concrete, a 25 mm layer of cellular polystyrene insulation and a 50 mm face slab of carbonate aggregate concrete. The resulting fire endurance was 2 hours. From Equation 7-4, the contribution of the 25 mm layer of foam polystyrene was calculated to be 5 minutes. Presumably, a comparable R-value for a 25 mm layer of foam polyurethane would be somewhat greater than for a 25 mm layer of foam polystyrene, but test values are not available. The above value for polystyrene is conservative for foam polyurethane.

Equation 7-4 can be rewritten as:

 \[ \mathrm{R}^{0.59}=(\mathrm{R}^{10.59}+\mathrm{R}^{20.59}+\ldots\mathrm{R}_{n}^{0.59}) \]

This form of the equation is useful in making a quick determination of whether an assembly qualifies for a particular classification when used in conjunction with Table 722.2.1.2(1) and Table 722.2.1.2(2).

## EXAMPLE:

GIVEN: A sandwich wall panel consists of two 63 mm wythes of normal-weight concrete with a 51 mm layer of foam polystyrene between them.

FIND: Does the panel qualify for a 3-hour fire-resistance rating?

SOLUTION: From Table 722.2.1.2(1) in the code, the value of  \( R_{n}^{0.59} \)  for a carbonate aggregate concrete is higher than for siliceous aggregate concrete, but because the type of concrete was not given, the value for siliceous should be used. From Section 722.2.1.2.2, the value of  \( R_{n}^{0.59} \)  for the 51 mm layer of foam polystyrene is 2.5.

 \[ \mathrm{R}^{0.59}=8.1+2.5+8.1=18.7 \]

From Table 722.2.1.2(2), a 3-hour rating is required to have an  \( R^{0.59} \)  value of 21.41.

18.7 < 21.41, thus the wall does not qualify for a 3-hour rating.

722.2.1.3 Joints between precast wall panels. Joints between precast concrete wall panels that are not insulated as required by this section shall be considered as openings in walls. Uninsulated joints shall be included in determining the percentage of openings permitted by Table 705.8. Where openings are not permitted or are required by this code to be protected, the provisions of this section shall be used to determine the amount of joint insulation required. Insulated joints shall not be considered openings for purposes of determining compliance with the allowable percentage of openings in Table 705.8.

* See the commentary to Section 705.8.
722.2.1.3.1 Ceramic fiber joint protection. Figure 722.2.1.3.1 shows thicknesses of ceramic fiber blankets to be used to insulate joints between precast concrete wall panels for various panel thicknesses and for joint widths of 10 mm and 25 mm for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours. For joint widths between 10 mm and 25 mm, the thickness of ceramic fiber blanket is allowed to be determined by direct interpolation. Other tested and labeled materials are acceptable in place of ceramic fiber blankets.

* Figure 722.2.1.3.1 was derived from data in the report entitled “Fire Tests of Joints Between Precast Concrete Wall Units: Effect of Various Joint Treatments” in the PCI Journal.
EXAMPLE:

FIND: Determine the thickness of a ceramic fiber blanket needed for a 2-hour fire-resistance rating for joints between 125 mm thick precast concrete wall panels made of siliceous aggregate concrete if the maximum joint width is 22 mm.

SOLUTION: Code Figure 722.2.1.3.1 indicates a minimum 18 mm thickness of ceramic fiber blanket for 125 mm panels for a 2-hour rating of a 20 mm wide joint and 53 mm for a 25 mm wide joint. By interpolation, the thickness is computed as follows:

 \[ t=2.1-(2.1-0.7)(1-\frac{1}{8})=49mm \]

Therefore, the required thickness for a 2-hour rating is 49 mm.

722.2.1.4 Walls with gypsum wallboard or plaster finishes. The fire-resistance rating of cast-in-place or precast concrete walls with finishes of gypsum wallboard or plaster applied to one or both sides shall be permitted to be calculated in accordance with the provisions of this section.

* The information contained in this section is based on fire endurance tests on unit masonry walls with gypsum wallboard and The Supplement to the National Building Code of Canada 1980 (NRCC 17724) by the National Research Council of Canada.

For instance, a wall with a rating of 1 hour that has a 25 mm layer of Portland cement-sand plaster applied on metal lath would add 30 minutes to the rating. Therefore, the fire-resistance rating would now be 1½ hours.

722.2.1.4.1 Nonfire-exposed side. Where the finish of gypsum wallboard or plaster is applied to the side of the wall not exposed to fire, the

===== Page 0645 =====
contribution of the finish to the total fire-resistance rating shall be determined as follows: The thickness of the finish shall first be corrected by multiplying the actual thickness of the finish by the applicable factor determined from Table 722.2.1.4(1) based on the type of aggregate in the concrete. The corrected thickness of finish shall then be added to the actual or equivalent thickness of concrete and fire-resistance rating of the concrete and finish determined from Tables 722.2.1.1 and 722.2.1.2(1) and Figure 722.2.1.2.

The fire resistance of concrete walls is generally determined by temperature rise on the unexposed surface (i.e., the heat transmission end point) (see commentary, Section 722.2.1.1). The time required to reach the heat transmission end point (fire-resistance rating) is primarily dependent upon the thickness of the concrete and the type of aggregate used to make the concrete. Where additional finishes are applied to the unexposed side of the wall, the time required to reach the heat transmission end point is delayed and the fire-resistance rating of the wall is thus increased. The increase in the rating contributed by the finish can be determined by considering the finish as adding to the thickness of concrete. However, since the finish material and concrete may have different insulating properties, the actual thickness of the finish may need to be corrected to be compatible with the type of aggregate used in the concrete. The correction is made by multiplying the actual finish thickness by the factor determined from Table 722.2.1.4(1), and then adding the corrected thickness to the thickness of the concrete. This equivalent thickness is used to determine the fire-resistance rating from Table 722.2.1.1, Table 722.2.1.2(1) or Figure 722.2.1.2.

See Table 722.2.1.4(1),
See the commentary to Section 722.2.1.4.1.
See Table 722.2.1.4(2)
See the commentary to section 722.2.1.4.2

722.2.1.4.2 Fire-exposed side. Where gypsum wallboard or plaster is applied to the fire-exposed side of the wall, the contribution of the finish to the total fire-resistance rating shall be determined as follows: The time assigned to the finish as established by Table 722.2.1.4(2) shall be added to the fire-resistance rating determined from Table 722.2.1.1 and Table 722.2.1.2(1) and Figure 722.2.1.2 for the concrete alone, or to the rating determined in Section 722.2.1.4.1 for the concrete and finish on the nonfire-exposed side.

Where finishes are added to the fire-exposed side of a concrete wall, their contribution to the total fire-resistance rating is based primarily upon the ability of the finish to remain in place, thus affording protection to the concrete wall. Table 722.2.1.4(2) lists the times that have been assigned to finishes on the fire-exposed side of the wall. These time-assigned values are based upon actual fire tests. The time-assigned values are added to the fire-resistance rating of the wall alone or to the rating determined for the wall and any finish on the unexposed side.

722.2.1.4.3 Nonsymmetrical assemblies. For a wall having no finish on one side or different types or thicknesses of finish on each side, the calculation procedures of Sections 722.2.1.4.1 and 722.2.1.4.2 shall be performed twice, assuming either side of the wall to be the fire-exposed side. The fire-resistance rating of the wall shall not exceed the lower of the two values.

Exception: For an exterior wall with a fire separation distance greater than 1500 mm the fire shall be assumed to occur on the interior side only.

Except for exterior walls having more than 1500 mm of horizontal separation, Section 705.5 requires that walls be rated for exposure to fire from both sides. Therefore, two calculations must be performed, on the assumption that each side of the wall is the fire-exposed side. Two calculations are not necessary for exterior walls with more than 1500 mm of horizontal separation or for other walls that are symmetrical (i.e., walls having the same type and thickness of finish on each side). The calculated fire-resistance rating of the wall is the lower of the two ratings determined, assuming that each side is the fire-exposed side.

722.2.1.4.4 Minimum concrete fire-resistance rating. Where finishes applied to one or both sides of a concrete wall contribute to the fire-resistance rating, the concrete alone shall provide not less than one-half of the total required fire-resistance rating. Additionally, the contribution to the fire resistance of the finish on the nonfire-exposed side of a load-bearing wall shall not exceed one-half the contribution of the concrete alone.

Where gypsum wallboard or plaster finishes are applied to a concrete wall, the calculated fire-resistance rating for the concrete alone should not be less than one-half the required fire-resistance rating. This limitation is necessary to ensure that the concrete wall is of sufficient thickness to withstand fire exposure. EXAMPLE:

===== Page 0646 =====
GIVEN: An exterior bearing wall of a building of Type IB construction with 1200 mm of horizontal separation is required to have a 2-hour fire-resistance rating. The wall will be cast in place with siliceous aggregate concrete. The interior will be finished with a 12.5 mm thickness of gypsum wallboard applied to steel furring members.

FIND: What is the minimum thickness of concrete required?
SOLUTION:

First calculation: Assume the interior to be the fire-exposed side.

From Table 722.2.1.4(2), the 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard has a time-assigned value of 15 minutes; therefore, the fire-resistance rating that must be developed by the concrete must not be less than 13 \( ^{1} \) / \( _{4} \)  hours (2 hours – 15 minutes).

2 Since Table 722.2.1.1 does not include a minimum thickness requirement corresponding to 1 \( ^{3} \) / \( _{4} \)  hours, direct interpolation between the values for 1 \( ^{3} \) / \( _{2} \)  and 2 hours is acceptable. The interpolation results in a required thickness of 118 mm of concrete.

Second calculation: Assume the exterior to be the fire-exposed side.

From Table 722.2.1.4(1), the multiplying factor for gypsum wallboard and siliceous aggregate concrete is 1.25; therefore, the corrected thickness for 12.5 mm of gypsum wallboard is 16 mm.

2 Table 722.2.1.1 requires 127 mm of siliceous aggregate concrete for a 2-hour fire-resistance rating. Therefore, the actual thickness of concrete required is 111 mm [127 mm – 16 mm].

3 Since the thickness of concrete required when assuming the interior side to be the fire-exposed side is greater, the minimum concrete thickness required to achieve a 2-hour fire-resistance rating is 118 mm.

4 Section 722.2.1.4.4 requires that the concrete alone provides no less than one-half the total required rating; thus, the concrete must provide at least a 1-hour rating. From Table 722.2.1.1, it can be seen that only 89 mm of siliceous aggregate concrete is required for 1 hour, whereas 118 mm will be provided.

For a similar example problem, see the commentary to Section 722.3.2.4.

722.2.1.4.5 Concrete finishes. Finishes on concrete walls that are assumed to contribute to the total fire-resistance rating of the wall shall comply with the installation requirements of Section 722.3.2.5.

* See the commentary to Section 722.3.2.5.
722.2.2 Concrete floor and roof slabs. Reinforced and prestressed floors and roofs shall comply with Section 722.2.2.1. Multicourse floors and roofs shall comply with Sections 722.2.2.2 and 722.2.2.3 respectively.

The fire test criteria for temperature rise of the unexposed surface and the ability to resist superimposed loads (heat transmission and structural criteria, respectively) must both be considered in determining the fire resistance of floors and roofs. Section 722.2.2 deals with heat transmission and Section 722.2.3 deals with structural criteria.

722.2.2.1 Reinforced and prestressed floors and roofs. The minimum thicknesses of reinforced and prestressed concrete floor or roof slabs for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours are shown in Table 722.2.2.1.

Exception: Minimum thickness shall not be required for floors and ramps within parking garages constructed in accordance with Sections 406.5 and 406.6.

The criterion limiting the average temperature rise to  \( 121^{\circ} \) C and the maximum rise at one point to  \( 163^{\circ} \) C is often referred to as the “heat transmission end point.” For solid concrete slabs, the heat transmission end point is primarily a function of slab thickness and aggregate type. Other factors that affect heat transmission to a lesser degree are moisture content of the concrete, aggregate size, mortar content and air content. Factors that have very little effect on heat transmission are cement content and strength; type; amount and location of reinforcement, provided these items are within the normal range of usage. The values in Table 722.2.2.1 apply to concrete slabs reinforced with bars or welded wire fabric, as well as to prestressed slabs.

The exception recognizes that Section 712.1.10.1 permits floor openings for automobile ramps in open and enclosed parking garages without shaft enclosures. Further, Exception 5 of Section 715.3 does not require fire-resistant joint systems for floors and ramps within open and enclosed parking garages or structures. Referenced standard ACI 216.1-07, Standard Method for Determining Fire Resistance of Concrete and Masonry Construction Assemblies, states that the purpose of the minimum thickness requirements (Section 722.2.2.1) is for “barrier fire resistance.” It can be concluded from Sections 712.1.10.1 and 715.3 that there is no intent of creating a fire barrier between floors and ramps in open and enclosed parking garages. Therefore, there is no logic in

===== Page 0647 =====
requiring a minimum thickness for floors and ramps of open and enclosed parking garages. See the commentary to Section 722.2.2.1.

722.2.2.1.1 Hollow-core prestressed slabs. For hollow-core prestressed concrete slabs in which the cores are of constant cross section throughout the length, the equivalent thickness shall be permitted to be obtained by dividing the net cross-sectional area of the slab including grout in the joints, by its width.

The method for determining equivalent thickness of masonry units was developed because the cores in masonry units taper. The method is, of course, also applicable to hollow-core precast concrete panels. However, because the cores in hollow-core panels do not taper, the equivalent thickness can be calculated by dividing the net cross-sectional area of the panel by its width.

722.2.2.1.2 Slabs with sloping soffits. The thickness of slabs with sloping soffits (see Figure 722.2.2.1.2) shall be determined at a distance 2t or 150 mm, whichever is less, from the point of minimum thickness, where t is the minimum thickness.

Some precast concrete wall panel sections (e.g., certain single-tee units) have tapered surfaces, so the thickness varies, as shown in Code Figure 722.2.2.1.2. In fire tests, it is customary to monitor the unexposed surface temperature at the location shown in the figure.

722.2.2.1.3 Slabs with ribbed soffits. The thickness of slabs with ribbed or undulating soffits (see Figure 722.2.2.1.3) shall be determined by one of the following expressions, whichever is applicable:

For s > 4t, the thickness to be used shall be t

For  \( s \leq 2t \) , the thickness to be used shall be  \( t_{e} \)

For 4t > s > 2t, the thickness to be used shall be

 \[ t+\left(\frac{4t}{s}-1\right)(t_{e}+t) \quad (7-5) \]

where:

s = Spacing of ribs or undulations.

t = Minimum thickness.

 \( t_{e}= \) Equivalent thickness of the slab calculated as the net area of the slab divided by the width, in which the maximum thickness used in the calculation shall not exceed 2t.

The portion of a ribbed slab that can be used in calculating equivalent thickness, t, is shown in code Figure 722.2.2.1.3. Note that the procedure does not give credit for joists in one- or two-way joisted floors or in double tees. For such sections, the minimum thickness of the deck slab must be used.

## Example

Find: Determine the fire-resistance rating of the floor section shown in Code Figure 722.2.2.1.3 if the units were made of siliceous aggregate concrete.

Solution:
s = 304.8 mm.

 \[ t=101.6\ mm. \]

Therefore:

 \[ t_{e}=\frac{(101.6)(304.8)(127)(40.64)(12.7)(25.4)(40.64)}{304.8} \]

 \[ t_{e}=121.92\ mm<2t. \]

Therefore, the thickness to be used,  \( t_{s} \) :

 \[ t_{s}=101.6+\left(\frac{(4)(101.6)}{304.8}-1\right)(121.92-101.6) \]

 \[ t_{s}=108.45\ mm. \]

From Table 722.2.2.1, using interpolation, the fire-resistance rating of the floor section shown is 1.48 hours or 1 hour, 29 minutes.

722.2.2.1.4 Flat plate concrete slabs with uniformly spaced hollow voids. Table 722.2.2.1 shall be used to determine the 1- and 2-hour fire-resistance ratings for flat plate concrete slabs with uniformly spaced hollow voids. The equivalent thickness of the slab shall be determined by dividing the net concrete volume of the slab by the floor area. The net concrete volume of the slab shall be equal to the volume of concrete of a solid slab minus the average concrete volume displaced by the hollow voids.

This Section includes prescriptive fire-resistance ratings for flat plate concrete slabs with uniformly spaced hollow voids based on equivalent thickness. In general, the equivalent thickness of a flat plate concrete slab with uniformly spaced hollow voids is equal to the net volume of concrete divided by the floor area. Table 722.2.2.1 provides the minimum slab thickness of reinforced concrete floor and roof assemblies to achieve fire-resistance ratings based on aggregate type. Flat plate concrete slabs with uniformly spaced hollow voids are similar to slabs with ribbed or undulating soffits, so an equivalent slab thickness must be calculated for use in Table 722.2.2.1.

To verify the system fire-resistance rating, a voided slab assembly was tested in accordance with the requirements of ASTM E119. The test assembly consisted of a 200 mm-thick, normal weight concrete slab with siliceous aggregate, a design compressive strength of 35 MPa, and a cover of 20 mm to the main flexural reinforcing bars. The equivalent thickness was 150 mm, calculated using the net concrete volume of the slab divided by the slab area. The edge of the slab on all four sides was supported vertically by the test frame, and no restraint was provided.

===== Page 0648 =====
for thermal expansion or rotation. As such, the assembly was unrestrained during the duration of the fire test, which is conservative for cast-in-place concrete slab systems.

The ASTM E119 test was terminated when the assembly reached the heat transmission end point at 2 hours 51 minutes, corresponding to a 2-hour fire-resistance rating. Throughout the duration of the test, the assembly supported the applied loading with no signs of collapse. Thus, the fire-resistance rating based on equivalent thickness is essentially the same as that determined from the fire test.

722.2.2.2.2 Multicourse floors. The fire-resistance ratings of floors that consist of a base slab of concrete with a topping (overlay) of a different type of concrete shall comply with Figure 722.2.2.2.

The information in this section is based on the report entitled “Fire Endurance of Two-course Floors and Roofs” in the ACI Journal. Figure 722.2.2.2 shows two-course concrete floor fire-resistance ratings. The Figure shows two conditions. The first is the fire-resistance rating based on the thickness of the sand-lightweight concrete overlay on the normal-weight concrete base slab and the concrete type. The second shows the fire-resistance rating based on the thickness of the overlay, the sand-lightweight concrete base, and the concrete type.

722.2.2.3 Multicourse roofs. The fire-resistance ratings of roofs that consist of a base slab of concrete with a topping (overlay) of an insulating concrete or with an insulating board and built-up roofing shall comply with Figure 722.2.2.3(1) and Figure 722.2.2.3(2).

The information in this section is based on the report entitled “Fire Endurance of Two-course Floors and Roofs” in the ACI Journal.

Figure 722.2.2.3(1) shows roofs that consist of a base slab of concrete with a topping (overlay) of insulating concrete materials and their fire-resistance ratings. The overlay materials could include cellular, perlite, and vermiculite concrete. The fire rating of those assemblies is based on the thickness of the concrete slab, the thickness of the overlay and the type of concrete. Figure 722.2.2.3(2) shows roofs that consist of a base slab of concrete with an insulating board and built-up roofing and their fire-resistance ratings. The insulating board and built-up roofing materials include a mineral board and glass fiberboard. The fire rating of those assemblies is based on the thickness of the concrete slab, the thickness of the mineral board or glass fiberboard and the type of concrete.
722.2.2.3.1 Heat transfer. For the transfer of heat, three-ply built-up roofing contributes 10 minutes to the fire-resistance rating. The fire-resistance rating for concrete assemblies such as those shown in Figure 722.2.2.3(1) shall be increased by 10 minutes. This increase is not applicable to those shown in Figure 722.2.2.3(2).

See the commentary to Section 722.2.2.3(2).

722.2.2.4 Joints in precast slabs. Joints between adjacent precast concrete slabs need not be considered in calculating the slab thickness provided that a concrete topping not less than 25 mm thick is used. Where no concrete topping is used, joints must be grouted to a depth of not less than one-third the slab thickness at the joint, but not less than 25 mm, or the joints must be made fire resistant by other approved methods.

Based on data developed by UL, where a concrete topping is not used over precast concrete floors, joints must be grouted. If a concrete topping at least 25 mm thick is used, the joints need not be grouted.

722.2.3 Concrete cover over reinforcement. The minimum thickness of concrete cover over reinforcement in concrete slabs, reinforced beams and prestressed beams shall comply with this section.

See the commentary to Sections 722.2.3.1, 722.2.3.2 and 722.2.3.3.

722.2.3.1 Slab cover. The minimum thickness of concrete cover to the positive moment reinforcement shall comply with Table 722.2.3(1) for reinforced concrete and Table 722.2.3(2) for prestressed concrete. These tables are applicable for solid or hollow-core one-way or two-way slabs with flat undersurfaces. These tables are applicable to slabs that are either cast in place or precast. For precast prestressed concrete not covered elsewhere, the procedures contained in PCI 124 shall be acceptable.

The temperature of the tensile reinforcement depends on the thickness of cover and aggregate type. For unrestrained slabs, the values shown in Table 722.2.3(1) and Table 722.2.3(2) are the cover thickness needed to keep the tensile reinforcement below 593°C and 427°C, respectively. For restrained slabs, the temperature of the tensile reinforcement is not as critical, and thus, a minimum cover of 20 mm is specified in PCA Bulletin 223, "Fire Endurance of Concrete Slabs as Influenced by Thickness, Aggregate Type and Moisture."

Table 722.2.3(1). See the commentary to Section 722.2.3.1.

Table 722.2.3(2). See the commentary to Section 722.2.3.1.

===== Page 0649 =====
Table 722.2.3(3). See the commentary to Section 722.2.3.2.

Table 722.2.3(4). See the commentary to Section 722.2.3.2.

Table 722.2.3(5). See the commentary to Section 722.2.3.3.

722.2.3.2 Reinforced beam cover. The minimum thickness of concrete cover to the positive moment reinforcement (bottom steel) for reinforced concrete beams is shown in Table 722.2.3(3) for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours.

For reinforced concrete beams, the critical steel temperature is  \( 593^{\circ} \) C, so the effect of aggregate type is minimal. The minimum concrete cover for the main reinforcement in Table 722.2.3(3) is based on the restrained or unrestrained condition, beam width and the fire-resistance-rating requirements. For an individual reinforcing bar, the minimum concrete cover is between the surface of the bar and the fire-exposed surface of the beam. For several bars, the concrete cover for corner bars used in the calculation shall be reduced to one-half of the actual value.

722.2.3.3 Pressed beam cover. The minimum thickness of concrete cover to the positive moment prestressing tendons (bottom steel) for restrained and unrestrained prestressed concrete beams and stemmed units shall comply with the values shown in Table 722.2.3(4) and Table 722.2.3(5) for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours. Values in Table 722.2.3(4) apply to beams 200 mm or greater in width. Values in Table 722.2.3(5) apply to beams or stems of any width, provided that the cross-section area is not less than 25800 mm². In case of differences between the values determined from Table 722.2.3(4) or Table 722.2.3(5), it is permitted to use the smaller value. The concrete cover shall be calculated in accordance with Section 722.2.3.3.1. The minimum concrete cover for nonprestressed reinforcement in prestressed concrete beams shall comply with Section 722.2.3.2.

For prestressed concrete, the comparable temperature is  \( 427^{\circ} \) C, so aggregate type must be considered. The data in Table 722.2.3(4) and Table 722.2.3(5) were derived from the fire tests of a series of beam specimens that ranged in width between 50 and 600 mm. The series of tests included size, aggregate type and amount of reinforcement. Tests were conducted at the PCA. The results of the fire tests of beams conducted at UL were also analyzed. Charts showing the resulting data are shown in PCI Manual 124, Design for Fire Resistance of Precast Prestressed Concrete. The minimum concrete cover for the prestressing tendons (bottom steel) in Table 722.2.3(4) and Table 722.2.3(5) is also based on the aggregate types that are being used in the concrete mix, specifically the use of carbonate, siliceous or sand lightweight. In some design requirements where nonprestressed reinforcement is needed to be used in prestressed concrete beams, the concrete cover of those reinforcement need to comply with Section 722.2.3.2.

722.2.3.3.1 Calculating concrete cover. The concrete cover for an individual tendon is the minimum thickness of concrete between the surface of the tendon and the fire-exposed surface of the beam, except that for unguarded ducts, the assumed cover thickness is the minimum thickness of concrete between the surface of the duct and the fire-exposed surface of the beam. For beams in which two or more tendons are used, the cover is assumed to be the average of the minimum cover of the individual tendons. For corner tendons (tendons equal distance from the bottom and side), the minimum cover used in the calculation shall be one-half the actual value. For stemmed members with two or more prestressing tendons located along the vertical centerline of the stem, the average cover shall be the distance from the bottom of the member to the centroid of the tendons. The actual cover for any individual tendon shall be not less than one-half the smaller value shown in Table 722.2.3(4) and Table 722.2.3(5), or 25 mm, whichever is greater.

See the commentary to Section 722.2.3.3.

722.2.4 Concrete columns. Concrete columns shall comply with this section.

Most building code provisions for reinforced concrete columns are based on two reports: "Fire Tests of Building Columns" by the

Associated Factory Mutual Insurance Companies and "Fire Resistance of Concrete Columns" by the NBS. Sizes of the tested columns were 300 mm, 400 mm and 450 mm. Nearly all of the columns withstood 4-hour fire tests that were essentially conducted in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263. Most of the tests were stopped after 4 hours, but some were continued to 8 hours. The shortest duration was 3 hours. At the time of the tests few, if any, concrete columns were smaller than 300 mm, but smaller columns have been in use for many years since then.

Fire tests conducted in Europe on smaller columns indicate that fire endurance is greater for larger columns.

Table 722.2.4 reflects the information cited in the reports listed in the commentary to Section 722.2.4 and in the report "Investigations on Building Fires, Part VI: Fire Resistance of

===== Page 0650 =====
Reinforced Concrete Columns" in the National Building Studies Research Paper No. 18. This table is for columns that may be exposed to fire on all sides. Notes a and b to Table 722.2.4 permit a smaller minimum dimension for columns than required in the table, provided the longer dimension of the column is at least 900 mm.

722.2.4.1 Minimum size. The minimum overall dimensions of reinforced concrete columns for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours for exposure to fire on all sides shall comply with this section.

Column requirements are based on provisions in ACI 216.1-07/TMS 0216.1-07, Code Requirements for Determining Fire Resistance of Concrete and Masonry Construction Assemblies, the successor to ACI 216.1-97/TMS 0216.1-97.

722.2.4.1.1 Concrete strength less than or equal to 83 MPa. For columns made with concrete having a specified compressive strength,  \( f'_{c} \) , of less than or equal to 83 MPa, the minimum dimension shall comply with Table 722.2.4.

For concrete with compressive strength less than 83 MPa, the minimum dimensions necessary to achieve certain fire-resistance ratings are given by Table 722.2.4. Concrete compressive strengths used in building construction are normally in the range of 28 to 40 MPa so this section and Table 722.2.4 are operative most of the time in determining fire-resistance ratings for concrete.

722.2.4.1.2 Concrete strength greater than 83 MPa. For columns made with concrete having a specified compressive strength,  \( f'_{c} \) , greater than 83 MPa, for fire-resistance ratings of 1 hour to 4 hours the minimum dimension shall be 600 mm.

Concrete with a compressive strength greater than 83 MPa is very rarely used in building construction. The concrete is very stiff, with a very low water-to-cement ratio, and therefore is very difficult to work with. Because it contains very small air pockets and voids, the material conducts heat relatively quickly when compared to more common concrete with compressive strengths in the 28 to 40 MPa range. Therefore, the minimum thickness necessary to achieve a fire-resistance rating of 1 to 4 hours is considerably higher.

722.2.4.2 Minimum cover for R/C columns. The minimum thickness of concrete cover to the main longitudinal reinforcement in columns, regardless of the type of aggregate used in the concrete and the specified compressive strength of concrete,  \( f'_{c} \) , shall be not less than 25 mm times the number of hours of required fire resistance or 50 mm, whichever is less.

The minimum concrete cover refers to the main longitudinal reinforcement, not ties or spirals.

722.2.4.3 Tie and spiral reinforcement. For concrete columns made with concrete having a specified compressive strength,  \( f'_{c} \) , greater than 83 MPa, tie and spiral reinforcement shall comply with the following:

1 The free ends of rectangular ties shall terminate with a 135-degree standard tie hook.

2 The free ends of circular ties shall terminate with a 90-degree standard tie hook.

3 The free ends of spirals, including at lap splices, shall terminate with a 90-degree standard tie hook.

The hook extension at the free end of ties and spirals shall be the larger of six bar diameters and the extension required by Section 25.3.2 of SBC 304. Hooks shall project into the core of the column.

The provisions in this Section are intended to prevent ties or spirals from disengaging from the longitudinal reinforcement should the concrete cover over the ties or spirals be lost during a fire. The Section expands on the provisions found in ACI 216.1/TMS 0216.1 by addressing spiral reinforcement, which is typically used for lateral reinforcement in round columns.

722.2.4.4 Columns built into walls. The minimum dimensions of Table 722.2.4 do not apply to a reinforced concrete column that is built into a concrete or masonry wall provided that all of the following are met:

1 The fire-resistance rating for the wall is equal to or greater than the required rating of the column.

2 The main longitudinal reinforcing in the column has cover not less than that required by Section 722.2.4.2.

3 Openings in the wall are protected in accordance with Section 716.

Where openings in the wall are not protected as required by Section 716, the minimum dimension of columns required to have a fire-resistance rating of 3 hours or less shall be 200 mm, and 250 mm for columns required to have a fire-resistance rating of 4 hours, regardless of the type of aggregate used in the concrete.

Table 722.2.4 does not apply to columns built into concrete or masonry walls that meet all three of the conditions in this section.

722.2.4.5 Precast cover units for steel columns. See Section 722.5.1.4.

See the commentary to Section 722.5.1.4.

===== Page 0651 =====
722.3 Concrete masonry. The provisions of this section contain procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of concrete masonry are established by calculations.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.3.1 Equivalent thickness. The equivalent thickness of concrete masonry construction shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this section.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.3.1.1 Concrete masonry unit plus finishes. The equivalent thickness of concrete masonry assemblies,  \( T_{ea} \) , shall be computed as the sum of the equivalent thickness of the concrete masonry unit,  \( T_{e} \) , as determined by Section 722.3.1.2, 722.3.1.3 or 722.3.1.4, plus the equivalent thickness of finishes,  \( T_{ef} \) , determined in accordance with Section 722.3.2:

 \[ T_{e a}=T_{e}+T_{e f} \quad (7-6) \]

 \( T_{e} = V_{n} / LH \)  = Equivalent thickness of concrete masonry unit (mm).

Where:

 \( V_{n} \)  = Net volume of masonry unit (mm \( ^{3} \) ).

L = Specified length of masonry unit (mm).

H = Specified height of masonry unit (mm).

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.3.1.2 Ungrouted or partially grouted construction.  \( T_{e} \)  shall be the value obtained for the concrete masonry unit determined in accordance with ASTM C 140.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.3.1.3 Solid grouted construction. The equivalent thickness,  \( T_{e} \) , of solid grouted concrete masonry units is the actual thickness of the unit.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.3.1.4 Airspaces and cells filled with loose-fill material. The equivalent thickness of completely filled hollow concrete masonry is the actual thickness of the unit where loose-fill materials are: sand, pea gravel, crushed stone, or slag that meet ASTM C 33 requirements; pumice, scoria, expanded shale, expanded clay, expanded slate, expanded slag, expanded fly ash, or cinders that comply with ASTM C 331; or perlite or vermiculite meeting the requirements of ASTM C 549 and ASTM C 516, respectively.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.3.2 Concrete masonry walls. The fire-resistance rating of walls and partitions constructed of concrete masonry units shall be determined from Table 722.3.2. The rating shall be based on the equivalent thickness of the masonry and type of aggregate used.
It has been accepted practice to determine the fire-resistance rating of concrete masonry walls based on the type of aggregate used to manufacture them and the equivalent thickness of solid material in the wall. Equivalent thicknesses shown in Table 722.3.2 have been developed and refined through actual fire testing. To determine the minimum equivalent thickness, Section 722.3.1.2 references ASTM C140.

EXAMPLE:
FIND: Determine the equivalent thickness of a standard 200 mm by 200 mm by 400 mm concrete masonry unit. The unit is normal weight with sand and gravel aggregate.

SOLUTION: The equivalent thickness is actually the average thickness of the solid material in the unit. The equivalent thickness is determined by the following:

 \[ \mathrm{T e}=\mathrm{A}/(\mathrm{L}\times\mathrm{H}) \]

where:

Te = Equivalent thickness, mm.

A = Net volume of unit, mm \( ^{3} \) .

L = Length of unit, mm.

H = Height of unit, mm.

Net volume, A, is determined by the following equation:

 \[ \mathbf{A}=\mathbf{C}/\mathbf{D} \]

where:

C = Dry weight of unit, kg.

D = Density of unit, kg per m³.

From data furnished by the manufacturer, the dry unit weight is 20 kg and the density is 2115 kg per m \( ^{3} \) ).

 \[ \mathrm{T e}=118\mathrm{~mm} \]

The fire-resistance rating for this type of unit with siliceous gravel aggregate can now be determined from Table 722.3.2. In this case, the fire-resistance rating will fall between 2.25 and 2.5 hours.

See the commentary to Section 722.3.2.

722.3.2.1 Finish on nonfire-exposed side. Where plaster or gypsum wallboard is applied to the side of the wall not exposed to fire, the contribution of the finish to the total fire-resistance rating shall be determined as follows: The thickness of gypsum wallboard or plaster shall be corrected by multiplying the actual thickness of the finish by applicable factor determined from Table 722.2.1.4(1). This corrected thickness of finish shall be added to the equivalent thickness of masonry and the fire-resistance rating of the masonry and finish determined from Table 722.3.2.

The information contained in this section is based on Fire Endurance Tests on Unit Masonry Walls with Gypsum Wallboard and The Supplement to the National Building Code

===== Page 0652 =====
of Canada 1980 by the National Research Council of Canada.

The fire resistance of concrete masonry walls is generally determined by temperature rise on the unexposed surface (i.e., the "heat transmission" end point). The time required to reach the heat transmission end point (fire-resistance rating) is primarily dependent upon the equivalent thickness of the masonry and the type of aggregate used to make the concrete. When additional finishes are applied to the unexposed side of the wall, the time required to reach the heat transmission end point is delayed; thus, the fire-resistance rating of the wall is increased. The increase in the rating contributed by the finish can be determined by considering the finish as an addition to the equivalent thickness of masonry. However, since the finish material and masonry may have different insulating properties, the actual thickness of the finish must be multiplied by a correction factor to be compatible with the type of aggregate used in the concrete. The correction is made by multiplying the actual finish thickness by the factor determined from Table 722.2.1.4(1), then adding the modified thickness to the equivalent thickness of masonry. This combined equivalent thickness is used to determine the fire-resistance rating from Table 722.3.2.

722.3.2.2 Finish on fire-exposed side. Where plaster or gypsum wallboard is applied to the fire-exposed side of the wall, the contribution of the finish to the total fire-resistance rating shall be determined as follows: The time assigned to the finish as established by Table 722.2.1.4(2) shall be added to the fire-resistance rating determined in Section 722.3.2 for the masonry alone, or in Section 722.3.2.1 for the masonry and finish on the nonfire-exposed side.

Where finishes are added to the fire-exposed side of a concrete masonry wall, their contribution to the total fire-resistance rating is based primarily on their ability to remain in place, thus affording protection to the masonry wall. Table 722.2.1.4(2) lists the times that have been assigned to finishes on the fire-exposed side of the wall. These time-assigned values are based on actual fire tests. The time-assigned values are added to the fire-resistance rating of the wall alone or to the rating determined for the wall and any finish on the unexposed side.

722.3.2.3 Nonsymmetrical assemblies. For a wall having no finish on one side or having different types or thicknesses of finish on each side, the calculation procedures of this section shall be performed twice, assuming either side of the wall to be the fire-exposed side. The fire-resistance rating of the wall shall not exceed the lower of the two values calculated.

Exception: For exterior walls with a fire separation distance greater than 1500 mm, the fire shall be assumed to occur on the interior side only.

Except for exterior walls having more than 1500 mm of FSD, Section 704.5 requires that walls be rated for exposure to fire from both sides. Therefore, two calculations must be performed, on the assumption that each side is the fire-exposed side. Two calculations are not necessary for exterior walls with an FSD of more than 1500 mm or for other walls that are symmetrical (i.e., walls having the same type and thickness of finish on each side). The calculated fire-resistance rating must not exceed the lower of the two ratings determined, assuming that each side is the fire-exposed side.

722.3.2.4 Minimum concrete masonry fire-resistance rating. Where the finish applied to a concrete masonry wall contributes to its fire-resistance rating, the masonry alone shall provide not less than one-half the total required fire-resistance rating.

Where gypsum wallboard or plaster finishes are applied to a concrete masonry wall, the concrete alone should be not less than one-half the required fire-resistance rating. This limitation is necessary to ensure that the masonry wall is of sufficient thickness to withstand fire exposure.

## EXAMPLE:

GIVEN: A wall required to have a 4-hour fire-resistance rating will be constructed with concrete masonry units of expanded shale aggregate. The wall will be finished on each side with a layer of 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard. FIND: What is the minimum equivalent thickness of concrete masonry required?

SOLUTION: Since the wall has the same type and thickness of finish on each side, only one calculation is required.

The 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard on the fire-exposed side has a time-assigned value of 15 minutes in accordance with Table 722.2.1.4(2).

Therefore, the fire resistance required to be provided by the masonry and gypsum wallboard on the unexposed side is 3 hours and 45 minutes (4 hours - 15 minutes).

3 From Table 722.2.1.4(1), the corrected thickness of gypsum wallboard on the unexposed side is 12.5 mm.

4 From Table 722.3.2, the minimum equivalent thickness of masonry, including the corrected

===== Page 0653 =====
thickness of gypsum wallboard, required for a rating of 3 hours and 45 minutes is 124 mm.

Therefore, the equivalent thickness of masonry required is 112 mm [124 mm - 12.5 mm].

6 From Table 722.3.2 it can be determined that 112 mm of expanded shale aggregate concrete masonry will provide a fire resistance of 3 hours. Therefore, the requirement that the masonry alone provide at least one-half of the total required rating is satisfied.

For a similar example problem, see the commentary to Section 722.2.1.4.4.

722.3.2.5 Attachment of finishes. Installation of finishes shall be as follows:

1 Gypsum wallboard and gypsum lath applied to concrete masonry or concrete walls shall be secured to wood or steel furning members spaced not more than 400 mm on center (o.c.).

2 Gypsum wallboard shall be installed with the long dimension parallel to the furring members and shall have all joints finished.

3 Other aspects of the installation of finishes shall comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 7 and 25.

This section provides prescriptive installation requirements for gypsum wallboard when installed on concrete masonry or concrete walls. Specification for gypsum wallboard materials and accessories are contained in Chapter 25.

722.3.3 Multiwthe masonry walls. The fire-resistance rating of wall assemblies constructed of multiple wythes of masonry materials shall be permitted to be based on the fire-resistance rating period of each wythe and the continuous airspace between each wythe in accordance with the following formula:

 \[ \begin{array}{c}R_{A}=(R_{1}^{0.59}+R_{2}^{0.59}+\cdots+R_{n}^{0.59}+A_{1}+A_{2}+\ldots+A_{n})^{1.7}\end{array} \quad (7-7) \]

where:

 \( R_{A} \)  = Fire endurance rating of the assembly (hours).

 \( R_{1}, R_{2} \)  = Fire endurance rating of wythes for  \( R_{n}, R_{n} \)  1, 2, n (hours), respectively.

 \( A_{1}, A_{2}=0.30 \) , factor for each continuous airspace for 1, 2, ..., n, respectively, having a depth of 12.5 mm or more between wythes.

This calculation method was first published in Report BMS 92 of the NBS.

722.3.4 Concrete masonry lintels. Fire-resistance ratings for concrete masonry lintels shall be determined based upon the nominal thickness of the lintel and the minimum thickness of concrete masonry or concrete, or any combination thereof, covering the main reinforcing bars, as determined in accordance with Table 722.3.4, or by approved alternate methods.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.3.5 Concrete masonry columns. The fire-resistance rating of concrete masonry columns shall be determined based upon the least plan dimension of the column in accordance with Table 722.3.5 or by approved alternate methods.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.4 Clay brick and tile masonry. The provisions of this section contain procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of clay brick and tile masonry are established by calculations.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.4.1 Masonry walls. The fire-resistance rating of masonry walls shall be based upon the equivalent thickness as calculated in accordance with this section. The calculation shall take into account finishes applied to the wall and airspaces between wythes in multiwithe construction.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.4.1.1 Equivalent thickness. The fire-resistance ratings of walls or partitions constructed of solid or hollow clay masonry units shall be determined from Table 722.4.1(1) or Table 722.4.1(2). The equivalent thickness of the clay masonry unit shall be determined by Equation 7-8 where using Table 722.4.1(1). The fire-resistance rating determined from Table 722.4.1(1) shall be permitted to be used in the calculated fire-resistance rating procedure in Section 722.4.2.

 \[ T_{e}=V_{n}/LH \quad (7-8) \]

where:

 \( T_{e} \)  = The equivalent thickness of the clay masonry unit (mm).

 \( V_{n} \)  = The net volume of the clay masonry unit (mm \( ^{3} \) ).

L = The specified length of the clay masonry unit (mm).

H = The specified height of the clay masonry unit (mm).

It has been accepted practice to determine the fire-resistance ratings of clay masonry walls by the ASTM E119 or UL 263 test method. In fact, Table 722.4.1(1) is based on tests performed by various laboratories in conformance with ASTM E119 or UL 263. Most notable are the NBS, Ohio State University Experiment Station and the University of California at Berkeley. New methods, however, have been developed.

===== Page 0654 =====
to evaluate the fire resistance of clay masonry by the equivalent thickness method, similar to concrete masonry. This approach was used in conjunction with extensive testing previously performed on clay masonry to develop Table 722.4.1(1).

722.4.1.1.1 Hollow clay units. The equivalent thickness,  \( T_{e} \) , shall be the value obtained for hollow clay units as determined in accordance with Equation 7-8. The net volume,  \( V_{n} \) , of the units shall be determined using the gross volume and percentage of void area determined in accordance with ASTM C 67.

See the commentary to Section 722.4.1.1.

722.4.1.1.2 Solid grouted clay units. The equivalent thickness of solid grouted clay masonry units shall be taken as the actual thickness of the units.

See the commentary to Section 722.4.1.1.

722.4.1.1.3 Units with filled cores.

The equivalent thickness of the hollow clay masonry units is the actual thickness of the unit where completely filled with loose-fill materials of: sand, pea gravel, crushed stone, or slag that meet ASTM C 33 requirements; pumice, scoria, expanded shale, expanded clay, expanded slate, expanded slag, expanded fly ash, or cinders in compliance with ASTM C 331; or perlite or vermiculite meeting the requirements of ASTM C 549 and ASTM C 516, respectively.

See the commentary to Section 722.4.1.1.

722.4.1.2 Plaster finishes. Where plaster is applied to the wall, the total fire-resistance rating shall be determined by the formula:

 \[ R=(R_{n}^{0.59}+p)^{1.7} \quad (7-9) \]

where:

 \( R = \frac{The\ fire-resistance\ rating}{of\ the\ assembly\ (hours)}. \)

 \( R_{n} = The fire-resistance rating of the individual wall (hours). \)

pl = Coefficient for thickness of plaster.

Values for  \( R_{n}^{0.59} \)  for use in Equation 7-9 are given in Table 722.4.1(3). Coefficients for thickness of plaster shall be selected from Table 722.4.1(4) based on the actual thickness of plaster applied to the wall or partition and whether one or two sides of the wall are plastered.

The variables for use in Equation 7-9 for determining the fire-resistance rating of plastered clay masonry walls are based on BMS 92, Fire Resistance Classifications of Building Construction, of the NBS. These values were derived from fire test results. The average thickness of plaster applied in the series of tests ranged from 12.5 mm to 19.1 mm. The thickness for which the coefficients of plaster in Table 722.4.1(4) are given are those most likely to be applied to a clay masonry wall. Ratings for other thicknesses provided can be obtained by substituting the appropriate coefficients in the formula.

A test of four hollow concrete unit walls shows the effect of one coat of plaster on the fire-exposed side to be about the same as for one coat of plaster on the unexposed side. Tests have not been made with plaster on the unexposed side of only clay hollow walls. However, the ratings resulting from Equation 7-9 for clay or tile masonry walls for plaster on one side are believed to have a sufficient margin of safety to be applicable to either the exposed or unexposed side of the wall.

EXAMPLE:

GIVEN: A 102 mm solid brick wall is required to have a 3-hour fire-resistance rating with clay masonry units.

FIND: The thickness of one side of plaster required to attain a 3-hour rating.

SOLUTION:

From Table 722.4.1(1), a 2-hour solid brick wall is 99 mm of equivalent thickness, and a 3-hour wall is 124 mm. Through interpolation (Note a), a 102 mm wall is approximately a 131-minute (2.18 hours) fire rating.

2 From Table 722.4.1(4), plaster has a coefficient of 0.3 for 12.5 mm thick plaster, 0.37 for 15.9 mm thick plaster or 0.45 for 19.1 mm thick plaster.

3 From Equation 7-9:  \( R = (R_{n}^{0.59} + p)^{1.7} \)

where:

 \[ \mathsf{R}=3 \]

 \[ \mathsf{R}_{\mathsf{n}}=\quad2.18 \]

 \[ 3=[(2.18)^{0.59}+p]^{1.7} \]

 \[ 1.91=1.584+pl \]

 \[  pl=.326. \]

4 Therefore, one coat of 15.9 mm thick sanded gypsum plaster on a 102 mm solid brick masonry wall would result in a 3-hour fire-resistance rating.

See the commentary to Section 722.4.1.2.

722.4.1.3 Multiwythe walls with airspace. Where a continuous airspace separates multiple wythes of the wall or partition, the total fire-resistance rating shall be determined by the formula:

 \[ R=(R_{1}^{0.59}+R_{2}^{0.59}+\ldots+R_{n}^{0.59}+a s)^{1.7} \quad (7-10) \]

where:

R = The fire endurance of the assembly (hours).

 \( R_{1} \) ,  \( R_{2} \)  = The fire endurance of the individual and  \( R_{n} \)  wall (hours).

===== Page 0655 =====
as = Coefficient for continuous airspace.
Values for  \( R_{0.59}^{0.59} \)  for use in Equation 7-10 are given in Table 722.4.1(3). The coefficient for each continuous airspace of 12.7 to 89 mm separating two individual wythes shall be 0.3.

Tests have shown that a continuous airspace separating two wythes of masonry can also increase the fire-resistance rating of a clay masonry wall. According to BMS 92 of the NBS, the coefficient for continuous airspace (as) between 12.5 mm and 89 mm is 0.3. Equation 7-10 provides the formula for calculating the fire-resistance ratings involving an airspace if the fire-resistance rating of the wythes separated by the airspace is known. The fire-resistance ratings for various wythes can be obtained from Table 722.4.1(1) and Table 722.4.1(2). The procedure for using Equation 7-10 is the same as Equation 7-9, except that a coefficient for airspace (as) is substituted for the coefficient of plaster (pl).

722.4.1.4 Nonsymmetrical assemblies. For a wall having no finish on one side or having different types or thicknesses of finish on each side, the calculation procedures of this section shall be performed twice, assuming either side to be the fire-exposed side of the wall. The fire resistance of the wall shall not exceed the lower of the two values determined.

Exception: For exterior walls with a fire separation distance greater than 1500 mm, the fire shall be assumed to occur on the interior side only.

Except for exterior walls having an FSD of more than 1500 mm, Section 704.5 requires that walls be rated for exposure to fire from both sides. Therefore, two calculation procedures must be performed, on the assumption that each side is the fire-exposed side. Two calculations are not necessary for exterior walls with an FSD of more than 1500 mm or for other walls that are symmetrical (i.e., having the same type and thickness of finish on each side). The calculated fire-resistance rating must not exceed the lower of the two values determined, assuming that each side is the fire-exposed side.

722.4.2 Multiwythe walls. The fire-resistance rating for walls or partitions consisting of two or more dissimilar wythes shall be permitted to be determined by the formula:

 \[ R=(R_{1}^{0.59}+R_{2}^{0.59}+\ldots+R_{n}^{0.59})^{1.7} \quad (7-11) \]

where:

R = The fire endurance of the assembly (hours).

 \( R_{1} \) ,  \( R_{2} \) =The fire endurance of the individual and  \( R_{n} \)  wall (hours).
Values for  \( R_{0.59}^{0.59} \)  for use in Equation 7-11 are given in Table 722.4.1(3).
Typically, the fire-resistance rating period for clay masonry walls is determined by the temperature rise on the unexposed side of the wall. This criterion is what Equation 7-11 is based on. According to the general theory of heat transmission, if walls of the same material are exposed to a heat source that maintains a constant surface temperature on the exposed side and the unexposed side is protected against heat loss, the time in which a given temperature will be attained on the unexposed side will vary as the square of the wall thickness does.

In the standard ASTM E119 or UL 263 test, which involves specified conditions of temperature measurement and a fire that increases the temperature at the exposed surface of the wall as the test proceeds, the time required to attain a given temperature rise on the unexposed side will differ when the temperature on the exposed side remains constant at the initial exposure temperature for any period. A degree of correlation between test results and calculations can be obtained by assuming that the variation is a lower power of n than the second power. The fire resistance of the wall can then be expressed by the formula:

 \[  R=(CV)^{n} \]

Where.

R = Fire-resistance period
C = Coefficient depending on the material, design of the wall and the units of measurement of R and V.

V = Volume of solid material per unit area of wall surface.

n = Exponent depending on the rate of increase of temperature at the exposed face of the wall. For walls of a given material and design, it was found that an increase of 50 percent in volume of solid material per unit area of wall surface resulted in a 100-percent increase in the fire-resistance period. This correlates to a value of 1.7 for n. A value of n less than 2 is expected, since an increasing temperature on the exposed surface would tend to shorten the fire-resistance rating of walls that would qualify for a higher rating.

The fire-resistance rating of a wall may be expressed in terms of the fire-resistance rating of the conjoined wythes, or laminate of the wall as follows:

 \[ \begin{aligned}&R_{1}=\left(C_{1}V_{1}\right)^{n}\\&R_{2}=\left(C_{2}V_{2}\right)^{n}\\ \end{aligned} \]

 \[ R_{n}=\left(C_{n}V_{n}\right)^{n} \]

===== Page 0656 =====
where  \( R_{1} \) ,  \( R_{2} \)  and  \( R_{n} \)  are the fire resistances of each conjoined wythe, the fire-resistance period of the composite wall will be:

 \[ R=\left(\sum_{i=1}^{n}C_{i}V_{i}\right)^{n} \]

Substituting for  \( C_{1}V_{1} \) ,  \( C_{2}V_{2} \)  and  \( C_{n}V_{n} \)  from the above relations yields:

 \[ R=\left(R_{1}^{1/n_{0}}+R_{2}^{1/n_{0}}+R_{n}^{1/n_{0}}\right)^{n_{0}} \]

Substituting 1.7 for n0 and 0.59 for 1/n0, the general formula becomes:

 \[ R=\left(R_{1}^{0.59}+R_{2}^{0.59}+R_{n}^{0.59}\right)^{1.7} \]

Equation 7-11 was developed by the NBS in the early 1940s and first appeared in Appendix B of BMS 92. It is noted that the fire-resistance rating has been expressed in terms of the fire-resistance rating of the component laminae of the wall, which need not be of the same material and design.

722.4.2.1 Multiwythe walls of different material. For walls that consist of two or more wythes of different materials (concrete or concrete masonry units) in combination with clay masonry units, the fire-resistance rating of the different materials shall be permitted to be determined from Table 722.2.1.1 for concrete; Table 722.3.2 for concrete masonry units or Table 722.4.1(1) or Table 722.4.1(2) for clay and tile masonry units.

A multiwythe wall (i.e., a wall consisting of two or more dissimilar materials) has a greater fire-resistance rating than a simple summation of the fire-endurance rating of the various layers. Equation 7-11 permits a calculated fire-resistance rating if the fire-resistance endurance rating is known for each dissimilar material. This section lists the applicable tables from Section 722 that can be used in conjunction with clay masonry walls to determine the total fire-resistance rating of a multiwythe wall composed of a combination of concrete, concrete masonry or clay masonry units.

722.4.3 Reinforced clay masonry lintels. Fire-resistance ratings for clay masonry lintels shall be determined based on the nominal width of the lintel and the minimum covering for the longitudinal reinforcement in accordance with Table 722.4.1(5).
See the commentary to Section 722.

722.4.4 Reinforced clay masonry columns. The fire-resistance ratings shall be determined based on the last plan dimension of the column in accordance with Table 722.4.1(6). The minimum cover for longitudinal reinforcement shall be 50 mm.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5 Steel assemblies. The provisions of this section contain procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of steel assemblies are established by calculations.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.1 Structural steel columns. The fire-resistance ratings of structural steel columns shall be based on the size of the element and the type of protection provided in accordance with this section.

Figure 722.5.1(1) through Figure 722.5.1(7) clarify the fire resistance of structural steel columns based on their configuration and the protection materials used.

See the commentary to Section 722.

Table 722.5.1(2).

This Table specifies the concrete properties that could be used if specific data are not available. The properties are mainly the thermal conductivity, specific heat, density, and free moisture content for both normal weight and lightweight structural concrete.

Table 722.5.1(3).

This -Table specifies the thermal conductivity of the masonry unit. The thermal conductivity is based on the density of the unit and the material of the unit whether it is concrete or clay.

Table 722.5.1(5).

This Table specifies the fire resistance of concrete masonry-protected steel columns. The requirements are based on the steel column size, the density of the clay masonry, and the equivalent thickness for the fire-resistance rating of the clay masonry protection assembly.

Table 722.5.1(6).

This Table specifies the fire resistance of clay masonry-protected steel columns. The requirements are based on the steel column size, the density of the clay masonry, and the equivalent thickness for the fire-resistance rating of the clay masonry protection assembly. Table 722.5.1(7).

This Table clarifies the minimum cover for steel columns encased in normal-weight concrete. The Table correlates the minimum cover based on the structural shape and required fire-resistance rating.

Table 722.5.1(9).

This Table clarifies the minimum cover for steel columns in normal-weight precast covers. The Table correlates the minimum cover based on the structural shape and required fire-resistance rating.

Table 722.5.1(10).

This Table clarifies the minimum cover for steel columns in structural lightweight precast covers. The Table correlates the minimum cover based on the structural shape and required fire-resistance rating.

===== Page 0657 =====
722.5.1.1 General. These procedures establish a basis for determining the fire resistance of column assemblies as a function of the thickness of fire-resistant material and, the weight, W, and heated perimeter, D, of structural steel columns. As used in these sections, W is the average weight of a structural steel column in kilogram per linear meter. The heated perimeter, D, is the inside perimeter of the fire-resistant material in millimeters as illustrated in Figure 722.5.1(1).

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.1.1.1 Nonload-bearing protection. The application of these procedures shall be limited to column assemblies in which the fire-resistant material is not designed to carry any of the load acting on the column.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.1.1.2 Embedments. In the absence of substantiating fire-endurance test results, ducts, conduit, piping, and similar mechanical, electrical, and plumbing installations shall not be embedded in any required fire-resistant materials.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.1.1.3 Weight-to-perimeter ratio. Table 722.5.1(1) contains weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D) for both contour and box fire-resistant profiles, for the wide flange shapes most often used as columns. For different fire-resistant protection profiles or column cross sections, the weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D) shall be determined in accordance with the definitions given in this section.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.1.2 Gypsum wallboard protection. The fire resistance of structural steel columns with weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D) less than or equal to 3.65 and that are protected with Type X gypsum wallboard shall be permitted to be determined from the following expression:

 \[ R=130\left[\frac{h\left(\frac{W^{\prime}}{D}\right)^{0.75}}{2.976}\right] \quad (7-12) \]

where:

R = Fire resistance (minutes).

h = Total thickness of gypsum wallboard (mm).

D = Heated perimeter of the structural steel column (mm).

 \( W' \) =Total weight of the structural steel column and gypsum wallboard protection (kilogram per linear meter).
 \( W' = W + 800 h D / 10^{6} \)

This Section specifies the fire performance requirements for gypsum wallboard. Fire resistance is a function of the total thickness of gypsum wallboard, the heated perimeter of the structural steel column and the total weight. The weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios should be less than or equal to 3.65.

722.5.1.2.1 Attachment. The gypsum board or gypsum panel products shall be supported as illustrated in either Figure 722.5.1(2) for fire-resistance ratings of 4 hours or less, or Figure 722.5.1(3) for fire-resistance ratings of 3 hours or less.

EXAMPLE:

GIVEN: A W310 × 202 column protected by 12.5 mm Type X gypsum wallboard as shown in Commentary Figure 722.5.1.2.1.

FIND: The fire-resistance rating of the column. SOLUTION:

The heated perimeter  \( D = 2(315 + 340) = 1310 \, mm \) .

 \[ W^{\prime}=202+\frac{(800)(12.5)(1310)}{10^{06}}=215.1 \]

 \[ \frac{h w^{\prime}}{D}=(12.5\times215.1)/1310=2.05. \]

 \[ R=130\left[\frac{h w^{\prime}}{D}\right]^{0.75}=130\left[\frac{2.05}{2.976}\right]^{0.75}=98.29 \]

minutes (1.63 hours).

5 Alternatively, from Table 722.5.1(1), the W/D ratio for a W310 × 202 is tabulated as 0.155. From Code Figure 722.5.1(4) using a W/D ratio of 0.155 and 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard, an R-value of approximately 1.6 hours is obtained.

722.5.1.2.2 Gypsum wallboard equivalent to concrete. The determination of the fire resistance of structural steel columns from Figure 722.5.1(4) is permitted for various thicknesses of gypsum wallboard as a function of the weight-to-heated perimeter ratio (W/D) of the column. For structural steel columns with weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D) greater than 3.65, the thickness of gypsum wallboard required for specified fire-resistance ratings shall be the same as the thickness determined for a W14 × 233 wide flange shape.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.1.3 Sprayed fire-resistant materials. The fire resistance of wide-flange structural steel columns protected with sprayed fire-resistant materials, as illustrated in Figure 722.5.1(5), shall be permitted to be determined from the following expression:

 \[ R=[C_{I}(W/D)+C_{2}]h \quad (7-13) \]

where:

===== Page 0658 =====
R Fire resistance (minutes).

h Thickness of sprayed fire-resistant material (mm).

D Heated perimeter of the structural steel column (mm).

 \( C_{1} \)  and Material-dependent constants.

 \( C_{2} \)

W Weight of structural steel columns (kilograms per linear meter).

The fire resistance of structural steel columns protected with intumescent, or mastic fire-resistant coatings shall be determined on the basis of fire-resistance tests in accordance with Section 703.2.

This section sets forth procedures for determining the fire resistance of structural steel columns protected with spray-applied cementitious or mineral fiber fire protection materials. These procedures do not apply to intumescent or mastic fire-resistant coatings, which must be tested in accordance with the requirements found in Section 703.2. These procedures are based on an empirical equation, which includes two material-dependent constants. As a result, in order to apply this equation, the values of these two constants must be determined for specific fire protection materials. The purpose of this section is to provide guidance for the determination of these constants so that the resulting equation will be reasonably accurate, and yet slightly conservative, over the range of column shapes for the test data that is available.

Two different techniques are available for determining the two constants. The first requires a knowledge of thermal conductivity and specific heat of the fire protection material at elevated temperatures. Data of this nature is both difficult and expensive to obtain with any reasonable degree of accuracy. As a result, this technique will probably not be widely used, and accordingly, it will not be described in this section.

The second technique involves the use of Equation 7-13 as a means for interpolating between ASTM E119 or UL 263 fire endurance test results on different structural steel columns. Since this technique will undoubtedly be the most widely used, it is described in detail in this section. It is, however, important to recognize that a wide variety of both large and small scale tests can be used to accurately determine the required constants. Inherent in Equation 7-13 is the fact that the ratio of fire endurance time to the thickness of fire protection material (R/h) varies linearly as a function of the increasing W/D ratio of the protected steel column. These concepts are graphically illustrated in the example that follows. It has been found that this assumption is reasonably accurate for lightweight (density less than 800 kg per m³) spray-applied materials.

If ASTM E119 or UL 263 fire endurance test results are available for a specific fire protection material on two different structural steel column shapes, the constants  \( C_{1} \)  and  \( C_{2} \)  can be determined directly. The resulting equation can then be used to determine the thickness of fire protection material required for any specified fire endurance rating where applied to structural steel columns with W/D ratios between the largest and smallest column for the actual test results that are available.

To determine the constants, at least four ASTM E119 or UL 263 fire endurance tests or a combination of two ASTM E119 or UL 263 fire endurance tests and six small-scale tests (900 mm long specimens) are conducted. If the results of the small-scale tests are used, at least two of the test assemblies are necessary to duplicate the ASTM E119 or UL 263 test assemblies for the purpose of establishing correlation. Regardless of the combination of small- and large-scale tests selected, at least two tests are conducted on the largest and two on the smallest columns to establish the limits of applicability to the resulting equation. The constants  \( C_{1} \)  and  \( C_{2} \)  are to be determined on the basis of the lowest ratios of fire endurance time to fire protection thickness (R/h) for these columns.

In addition, the test data need to be evaluated with respect to the assumption that the ratio of fire endurance to fire protection thickness (R/h) is reasonably constant for a given column shape [(W/D) ratio]. The tests conducted on columns of the same shape are designed so that the resulting fire endurance times are approximately 1½ and 3½ hours. In evaluating the R/h ratios resulting from the tests on the same column shape, differences in the range of 10 percent are typical. Differences greater than 20 percent may, however, suggest that Equation 7-13 is not applicable to the specific fire protection material under consideration, and further examination of the test data is warranted.

## EXAMPLE:

GIVEN: The fire endurance test data given in Commentary Figure 722.5.1.3.

FIND: The thickness of a spray-applied cementitious material required for a 3-hour rating on a W12 × 136.

SOLUTION:

Determine  \( C_{1} \)  and  \( C_{2} \) . From the end points of the graph:

R/h = 75 for a W/D ratio of 0.6 and

R/h = 200 for a W/D ratio of 2.5.

===== Page 0659 =====
From this, two equations with two unknowns are created:
 \[ 75 = C_{1}(0.6) + C_{2}.  \]
 \[ 200 = C_{1}(2.5) + C_{2}.  \]
Solving these results in:  \( C_{1} = 65.79 \) ;  \( C_{2} = 35.53 \)  and Equation 7-13, with h in the denominator, becomes:
 \[  R/h = 65.79 \quad (W/D) + 35.53.  \]
From Table 722.5.1(1), a  \( W_{12} \times 136 \)  has a  \( W/D \)  ratio of 1.82.
The required fire resistance is 180 minutes. Calculating for h yields:
 \[  180 = \frac{[(65.79)(1.82) + 35.53]h}{h = 29mm}.  \]
Therefore, the required thickness of the spray-applied material is 29 mm.

722.5.1.3.1 Material-dependent constants. The material-dependent constants,  \( C_{1} \)  and  \( C_{2} \) , shall be determined for specific fire-resistant materials on the basis of standard fire endurance tests in accordance with Section 703.2. Unless evidence is submitted to the building official substantiating a broader application, this expression shall be limited to determining the fire resistance of structural steel columns with weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios (W/D) between the largest and smallest columns for which standard fire-resistance test results are available.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.1.3.2 Identification. Sprayed fire-resistant materials shall be identified by density and thickness required for a given fire-resistance rating. See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.1.4 Concrete-protected columns. The fire resistance of structural steel columns protected with concrete, as illustrated in Figure 722.5.1(6)(a) and (b), shall be permitted to be determined from the following expression:

 \[ R=R_{o}\left(1+0.03m\right) \quad (7-14) \]

where:

 \[ \begin{aligned}&R_{0}=73\left(\frac{W}{D}\right)^{0.7}+\\ &0.107\left(\frac{h^{1.6}}{kc^{0.2}}\right)\times\left[1+30784\left(\frac{h}{p_{c}}c_{e}h\left(L+h\right)\right]^{0.8}\\ \end{aligned} \]

As used in these expressions:

R Fire endurance at equilibrium moisture conditions (minutes)

 \( R_{0} \)  Fire endurance at zero moisture content (minutes)

m Equilibrium moisture content of the concrete by volume (percent)

W Average weight of the steel column (kilograms per linear meter)

D Heated perimeter of the steel column (mm)

h Thickness of the concrete cover (mm)

 \( k_{c} \)  Ambient temperature thermal conductivity of the concrete (Watt/m. \( ^{\circ} \) K)

H Ambient temperature thermal capacity of the steel column (0.46W (kJ/m.°K))

 \( p_{c} \)  Concrete density (kg per  \( m^{3} \) )

 \( c_{c} \)  Ambient temperature specific heat of concrete (kJ/kg. \( ^{\circ} \) K)

L Interior dimension of one side of a square concrete box protection (mm)

## EXAMPLE:

GIVEN: A W200 × 417 steel column encased in lightweight concrete (density = 1762 kg per  \( m^{3} \) ) shown in Code Figure 722.5.1(4), with all re-entrant spaces filled with concrete cover 32 mm and a moisture content of 5 percent. The web thickness is 7.24 mm.

FIND: The fire-resistance rating.

SOLUTION:

 \[ \begin{aligned}&D=4(166)+2(205)-2(7.24)=1059mm\\&W/D=41.7kg/m/1059mm lb/ft/41.69^{2}=0.039\\&kg/m-mm.\\ \end{aligned} \]

 \[ \mathrm{h}=32\mathrm{~mm} \]

 \[ \mathrm{k}_{\mathrm{c}}=0.605\mathrm{~W}/\mathrm{m}.\mathrm{~}^{\circ}\mathrm{K} \]

 \[ \mathrm{c}_{\mathrm{c}}=0.88\mathrm{~kJ}/\mathrm{kg}\cdot^{\circ}\mathrm{K} \]

 \[ \mathrm{r}_{\mathrm{c}}=1762\mathrm{~kg~per~m}^{3} \]

 \[ \mathrm{L}=(166+205)/2=185.50\mathrm{~mm} \]

 \[ \mathrm{A}_{\mathrm{s}}=\quad5320\mathrm{~mm}^{2} \]

 \[ \mathrm{H}=0.46(41.70)+\frac{\left[(1762)(0.88)\right]\left[(166)(205)-5320\right]}{100^{6}}=63.69 \]

 \[ \mathrm{R}_{0}=73(0.039)^{0.70}+0.107\left(\frac{321.6}{0.605^{0.20}}\right)\left[1+\right. \]

 \[ 30784\left(\frac{1762x0.88x32x(185.5+32)}{0.80}\right] \]

 \[ \mathrm{R}_{0}=98.73\mathrm{~Minutes} \]

Therefore,

 \[ \mathrm{R}=99[1+0.03(5)]=114\ \mathrm{minutes}. \]

For comparison purposes, the minimum cover requirement for a  \( W_{200} \times 41.70 \)  steel column from Table 722.5.1(8) is 25 mm for a  \( 1\frac{1}{2} \) -hour rating. The column does not quite meet the required fire rating for a 2-hour column since 40 mm is required. Therefore, the fire resistance of the column is  \( 1\frac{1}{2} \)  hours.

722.5.1.4.1 Reentrant space filled. For wide-flange structural steel columns completely encased in concrete with all reentrant spaces filled [Figure 722.5.1(6)(c)], the thermal capacity of the concrete within the reentrant spaces shall be permitted to be added to the thermal capacity of the steel column, as follows:

 \[ H=0.46W+1x10^{-6}p_{c}c_{c}(b_{f}d-A_{s}) \quad (7-15) \]

where:

 \( b_{f}= \)  Flange width of the steel column (mm)

===== Page 0660 =====
D = Depth of the steel column (mm)

 \( A_{s} \)  = Cross-sectional area of the steel column (square mm)

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.1.4.2 Concrete properties unknown. If specific data on the properties of concrete are not available, the values given in Table 722.5.1(2) are permitted.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.1.4.3 Minimum concrete cover. For structural steel column encased in concrete with all reentrant spaces filled, Figure 722.5.1(6)(c) and Table 722.5.1(7) and Table 722.5.1(8) indicate the thickness of concrete cover required for various fire-resistance ratings for typical wide-flange sections. The thicknesses of concrete indicated in these tables apply to structural steel columns larger than those specified.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.1.4.4 Minimum precast concrete cover. For structural steel columns protected with precast concrete column covers as shown in Figure 722.5.1(6), illustration (a), Tables 722.5.1(9) and 722.5.1(10) indicate the thickness of the column covers required for various fire-resistance ratings for typical wide-flange shapes. The thicknesses of concrete given in these tables apply to structural steel columns larger than those specified.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.1.4.5 Masonry protection. The fire resistance of structural steel columns protected with concrete masonry units or clay masonry units as illustrated in Figure 722.5.1(7) shall be permitted to be determined from the following expression:

 \[ \begin{aligned}&R=1.24\left(W/D\right)^{0.7}+\left[0.0018\left(T_{e}^{1.6}/K_{m}^{0.2}\right)\right]x\\&\left[1.0+392.76\left(\left(4_{d}/d_{m}T\right)/\left(0.25p+T_{e}\right)^{0.8}\right)\right]\end{aligned} \quad (7-16) \]

where:

R = Fire-resistance rating of column assembly (hours).

W = Average weight of steel column (kg per m³).

D = Heated perimeter of structural steel column (mm) [see Figure 722.5.1(7)].

 \( T_{e} \)  = Equivalent thickness of concrete or clay masonry unit (mm) (see Table 722.3.2 Note a or Section 722.4.1).

 \( K_{m}= \)  Thermal conductivity of concrete or clay masonry unit (Watt/m. \( ^{\circ} \) K) [see Table 722.5.1(3)].

 \( A_{s} \)  = Cross-sectional area of structural steel column (square mm).
 \( d_{m} \)  = Density of the concrete or clay masonry unit (kg per m \( ^{3} \) ).

p = Inner perimeter of concrete or clay masonry protection (mm)

[see Figure 722.5.1(7)].

722.5.1.4.6 Equivalent concrete masonry thickness. For structural steel columns protected with concrete masonry, Table 722.5.1(5) gives the equivalent thickness of concrete masonry required for various fire-resistance ratings for typical column shapes. For structural steel columns protected with clay masonry, Table 722.5.1(6) gives the equivalent thickness of concrete masonry required for various fire-resistance ratings for typical column shapes.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.2 Structural steel beams and girders. The fire-resistance ratings of structural steel beams and girders shall be based upon the size of the element and the type of protection provided in accordance with this section.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.2.1 Determination of fire resistance. These procedures establish a basis for determining resistance of structural steel beams and girders that differ in size from that specified in approved fire-resistance-rated assemblies as a function of the thickness of fire-resistant material and the weight  \( (W) \)  and heated perimeter  \( (D) \)  of the beam or girder. As used in these sections, W is the average weight of a structural steel element in kilogram per linear meter. The heated perimeter, D, is the inside perimeter of the fire-resistant material in millimeters as illustrated in Figure 722.5.2.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.2.1.1 Weight-to-heated perimeter. The weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios  \( (W/D) \) , for both contour and box fire-resistant protection profiles, for the wide flange shapes most often used as beams or girders are given in Table 722.5.1(4). For different shapes, the weight-to-heated-perimeter ratios  \( (W/D) \)  shall be determined in accordance with the definitions given in this section.

See the commentary to Section 722.

722.5.2.1.2 Beam and girder substitutions. Except as provided for in Section 722.5.2.2, structural steel beams in approved fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall be considered to be the minimum permissible size. Other beam or girder shapes shall be permitted to be substituted provided that the weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio  \( (W/D) \)  of

===== Page 0661 =====
the substitute beam is equal to or greater than that of the beam specified in the approved assembly.

This section defines a general rule for the substitution of different steel beam and girder shapes in all fire-resistant assemblies. In the past, the substitution of larger beams has been permitted based on the thickness of web and flange elements. Extensive research at UL has proven that the heat transfer to a protected steel beam or girder is a direct function of the W/D ratio. As a result, beam substitutions should be based on W/D ratios, as defined in this section. The significance of the thickness of web and flange elements is inherently included in the determination of W/D ratios. Code Figure 722.5.2 illustrates the procedure for determining heated perimeters (D), and Table 722.5.1(4) provides W/D ratios for the most commonly used wide flange beam and girder shapes.

722.5.2.2 Sprayed fire-resistant materials. The provisions in this section apply to structural steel beams and girders protected with sprayed fire-resistant materials. Larger or smaller beam and girder shapes shall be permitted to be substituted for beams specified in approved unrestrained or restrained fire-resistance-rated assemblies, provided that the thickness of the fire-resistant material is adjusted in accordance with the following expression:

 \[ h2=\frac{\left(\frac{(W1)}{D1}\right)+0.035}{\left(\frac{(W2)}{D2}\right)+0.035} \quad (7-17) \]

where:

h = Thickness of spray-applied fire-resistant material in mm.

W=Weight of the structural steel beam or girder in kg/m

D = Heated perimeter of the structural steel beam or girder in mm

Subscript 1 refers to the beam and fire-resistant material thickness in the approved assembly.

Subscript 2 refers to the substitute beam or girder and the required thickness of fire-resistant material. The fire resistance of structural steel beams and girders protected with intumescent, or mastic fire-resistant coatings shall be determined on the basis of fire-resistance tests in accordance with Section 703.2.

This section defines an equation for adjusting the thickness of spray-applied cementitious and mineral fiber materials as a function of W/D ratios. This equation was developed by UL, and appropriate limitations have been included. The minimum W/D ratio of 0.37 in Section 722.5.2.2.1 will prevent the use of this equation for determining the fire resistance of very small shapes that have not been tested. The 10 mm minimum thickness of protection is a practical limit based upon the most commonly used spray-applied fire protection materials.

EXAMPLE:
GIVEN: Determine the thickness of spray-applied fire protection required to provide a 2-hour fire-resistance rating for a W310 × 24 beam to be substituted for a W200 × 22 beam requiring 37 mm of protection for the same rating.

SOLUTION:

 \[ \begin{array}{l}From Table 722.5.1(4):\\W_{1}/D_{1}\quad=\quad0.033for W200\times22.7\\W_{2}/D_{2}\quad=\quad0.027for W310\times24\\h_{1}\quad=\quad37mm.\\\end{array} \]

 \[ 0.033+0.035\div0.027+0.035\times37 \]

It is noted within this section that intumescent, or mastic fire-resistant coatings are required to be tested in accordance with the requirements of Section 703.2.

722.5.2.2.1 Minimum thickness. The use of Equation 7-17 is subject to the following conditions:

1 The weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio for the substitute beam or girder  \( (W_{2}/D_{2}) \)  shall be not less than 0.37.

2 The thickness of fire protection materials calculated for the substitute beam or girder  \( (T_{i}) \)  shall be not less than 10 mm.

3 The unrestrained or restrained beam rating shall be not less than 1 hour.

4 Where used to adjust the material thickness for a restrained beam, the use of this procedure is limited to structural steel sections classified as compact in accordance with SBC 306.

* See the commentary to Section 722.5.2.2.

722.5.2.3 Structural steel trusses. The fire resistance of structural steel trusses protected with fire-resistant materials sprayed to each of the individual truss elements shall be permitted to be determined in accordance with this section. The thickness of the fire-resistant material shall be determined in accordance with Section 722.5.1.3. The weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio (W/D) of truss elements that can be simultaneously exposed to fire on all sides shall be determined on the same basis as columns, as specified in Section 722.5.1.1. The weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio (W/D) of truss elements that directly support floor or roof assembly shall be determined on the same basis as

===== Page 0662 =====
beams and girders, as specified in Section 722.5.2.1.

The fire resistance of structural steel trusses protected with intumescent, or mastic fire-resistant coatings shall be determined on the basis of fire-resistance tests in accordance with Section 703.2.

This section describes the application of spray-applied fire protection to structural steel trusses when each truss element is individually protected with spray-applied materials. The

thickness of protection is determined using the column equation specified in Section 722.5.1.3. For trusses, the column equation is more technically correct than the beam equation, since it requires greater thicknesses of protection than the beam equation. Most truss elements can be exposed to fire on all four sides simultaneously. As a result, the heated perimeter of truss elements should be determined in the same manner as for columns. However, an exception is included for top chord elements that directly support floor or roof construction. The heated perimeter of such elements should be determined in the same manner as for beams and girders.

This section notes that intumescent and mastic fire-resistant materials must be tested in accordance with the requirements in Section 703.2.

722.6 Wood assemblies. The provisions of this section contain procedures by which the fire-resistance ratings of wood assemblies are established by calculations.

The information contained in this section is based on Technical Paper No. 222 of the Division of Building Research Council of Canada entitled "Fire Endurance of Light Framed and Miscellaneous Assemblies" and NBS Report BMS 92. The fire-resistance rating is equal to the sum of the time assigned to the membranes [see Table 722.6.2(1)], the time assigned to the framing members [see Table 722.6.2(2)] and the time assigned for additional contribution by other protective measures, such as insulation [see Table 722.6.2(5)]. The membrane on the unexposed side is not included in the calculations. It is assumed that once the structural members fail, the entire assembly fails. The time assigned to an individual membrane is the individual contribution to the overall fire-resistance rating of the complete assembly. The assigned time is not to be confused with the fire-resistance rating of the membranes. Fire-resistance rating takes into account the rise in temperature on the unexposed side of the membrane. Times that have been assigned to membranes on the fire-exposed side of the assembly are based on their ability to remain in place during fire tests.
The fire-resistance rating of wood-frame assemblies is equal to the sum of the time assigned to the various components (membranes) on the fire-exposed side and the structural members. Interior walls and partitions, exterior walls within 1500 mm of a lot line or assumed lot line and some shaft walls must be designed for fire resistance by assuming that either side of the wall is exposed to fire.

Mineral fiber insulation provides additional protection to wood studs by shielding the studs from exposure to the furnace, thus delaying the time of collapse. The use of reinforcement in the membrane exposed to fire also adds to the fire resistance by extending the time to failure. Special care must be taken to ensure that all insulation materials used in conjunction with this method satisfy the weight criteria of Table 722.6.2(5).

The following are examples of how to use this section:

EXAMPLE 1:

GIVEN: The exterior wall assembly shown in Commentary Figure 722.6 having a layer of 12.5 mm wood structural panel bonded with exterior glue covered with a layer of 15.8 mm gypsum wallboard and attached to studs spaced at 406 mm on center (o.c.).

FIND: Does the wall assembly qualify as a 1-hour fire-resistant wall assembly?

SOLUTION: From Table 722.6.2(1) and Table 722.6.2(2):

Wood structural panel = 10 minutes.

Gypsum wallboard = 30 minutes.

Wood studs = 20 minutes.

Total = 60 minutes.

Therefore, the wall qualifies as a 1-hour wall. If the wall is an interior wall, both sides would be required to be fire protected with at least 40 minutes of membrane coverings (60 minutes - 20 minutes for wood frame).

It should be noted that Section 722.6.2.3 requires the exterior side to be protected in accordance with Table 722.6.2(3).

It should also be noted that if the wall cavities between the studs are filled with mineral fiber batts weighing no less than that specified in Table 722.6.2(5), the 12.5 mm plywood membrane layer could be eliminated because the insulation adds 15 minutes of fire resistance, as indicated in Section 722.6.2.5 and Table 722.6.2(5). Thus, adding the contribution times for the 15.9 mm gypsum board, the wood framing and the insulation (30 minutes + 20 minutes + 15 minutes), the resultant rating for the wall would be 65 minutes and meet a 1-hour fire-resistance rating.

===== Page 0663 =====
## EXAMPLE 2:

GIVEN: A floor/ceiling assembly using wood joists spaced at 406 mm o.c., protected on the bottom side (ceiling side) with two layers of 12.5 mm Type X gypsum wallboard and protected on the upper side (floor side) with a 12.5 mm plywood subfloor, a 15.9 mm panel type underlayment and carpet.

FIND: Does the floor/ceiling assembly meet the requirements of a 1-hour fire-resistance-rated assembly?

SOLUTION: Referring to Sections 722.6.2.1 and 722.6.2.4, Table 722.6.2(1) indicates that the time contribution for each layer of 12.5 mm Type X gypsum wallboard is 25 minutes. The time of contribution for wood joists 406 mm o.c. is listed in Table 722.6.2(2) as 10 minutes. By adding the two layers of gypsum board (2 × 25 minutes) to the wood frame (10 minutes), a fire-resistance rating of 60 minutes, or 1 hour, can be obtained. It should be noted that Section 722.6.2.4 requires the upper membrane to be specified as in Table 722.6.2(4) or any membrane that has a time of contribution of at least 15 minutes as listed in Table 722.6.2(1). If the above example had been a roof/ceiling assembly, the upper membrane would have been treated the same. If the proposed assembly is a ceiling with an attic above, Section 722.6.2.4 notes the exception to Section 711.2.6, which allows the elimination of the upper membrane.

722.6.1 General. This section contains procedures for calculating the fire-resistance ratings of walls, floor/ceiling and roof/ceiling assemblies based in part on the standard method of testing referenced in Section 703.2.

## See the commentary to Section 722.6.

722.6.1.1 Maximum fire-resistance rating. Fire-resistance ratings calculated for assemblies using the methods in Section 722.6 shall be limited to not more than 1 hour.

## See the commentary to Section 722.6.

722.6.1.2 Dissimilar membranes. Where dissimilar membranes are used on a wall assembly that requires consideration of fire exposure from both sides, the calculation shall be made from the least fire-resistant (weaker) side.

In a typical wall assembly, particularly an interior wall assembly, the membrane (finish) on both sides is the same material, such as 12.5 mm gypsum board; however, it is not uncommon for different types of membranes to be utilized in a single wall assembly. For example, an exterior wall may have gypsum board on the interior side and vinyl siding and gypsum sheathing on the exterior side. Further, an interior wall may have 12.5 mm gypsum board on one side and wood or metal furring and 16 mm-thick gypsum board on the other side to accommodate casework installation. In these cases, fire resistance-rated calculation shall be made by the least fire-resistant side. In situations where it is not clear which side is the least fire resistant, a calculation from each side separately can be made and the lesser of the two ratings would be the governing rating.

722.6.2 Walls, floors and roofs. These procedures apply to both load bearing and nonload-bearing assemblies.

## See the commentary to Section 722.6.

722.6.2.1 Fire-resistance rating of wood frame assemblies. The fire-resistance rating of a wood frame assembly is equal to the sum of the time assigned to the membrane on the fire-exposed side, the time assigned to the framing members and the time assigned for additional contribution by other protective measures such as insulation. The membrane on the unexposed side shall not be included in determining the fire resistance of the assembly.

## See the commentary to Section 722.6.

722.6.2.2 Time assigned to membranes. Table 722.6.2(1) indicates the time assigned to membranes on the fire-exposed side.

## See the commentary to Section 722.6.

722.6.2.3 Exterior walls. For an exterior wall with a fire separation distance greater than 3000 mm, the wall is assigned a rating dependent on the interior membrane and the framing as described in Table 722.6.2(1) and Table 722.6.2(2). The membrane on the outside of the nonfire-exposed side of exterior walls with a fire separation distance greater than 3000 mm shall consist of sheathing, sheathing paper and siding as described in Table 722.6.2(3).

## See the commentary to Section 722.6.

722.6.2.4 Floors and roofs. In the case of a floor or roof, the standard test provides only for testing for fire exposure from below. Except as noted in Section 703.2.2, Item 5, floor or roof assemblies of wood framing shall have an upper membrane consisting of a subfloor and finished floor conforming to Table 722.6.2(4) or any other membrane that has a contribution to fire resistance of not less than 15 minutes in Table 722.6.2(1).

## See the commentary to Section 722.6.

722.6.2.5 Additional protection. Table 722.6.2(5) indicates the time increments to be added to the fire resistance where glass fiber, rockwool, slag mineral wool or cellulose insulation is incorporated in the assembly.

## See the commentary to Section 722.6.

722.6.2.6 Fastening. Fastening of wood frame assemblies and the fastening of membranes

===== Page 0664 =====
to the wood framing members shall be done in accordance with Chapter 23.

See the commentary to Section 722.6.

722.7 Fire-resistance rating for mass timber. The required fire resistance of mass timber elements in Section 602.4 shall be determined in accordance with Section 703.2. The fire-resistance rating of building elements shall be as required in Table 601 and Table 705.5 and as specified elsewhere in this code. The fire-resistance rating of the mass timber elements shall consist of the fire resistance of the unprotected element added to the protection time of the noncombustible protection.

Typically, mass timber elements will be large due to structural requirements. In addition, CLT panels typically are utilized in odd-number laminations. This typically results in excess capacity which means better fire endurance. Thus, mass timber elements are conservative in their fire-resistance ratings.

This Section outlines a method to calculate the fire-resistance rating of a protected wood element by adding the fire-resistance rating of the unprotected wood member together with the protection time provided by the noncombustible protection applied to the exposed wood.

The fire-resistance rating of mass timber is permitted to be determined by multiple methods described in Section 703.2 that are based on the ASTM E119 or UL263 test protocol. With mass timber elements, the total overall fire-resistance rating of a mass timber element is the sum of the fire-resistance rating of the unprotected exposed wood member added to the time assigned to the noncombustible protection's contribution, determined by the procedure described in Section 703.6 or tabulated in Table 722.7.1(1). This result must meet or exceed the required fire-resistance rating values found in various provisions in this code.

The user should also be aware of related provisions for penetrations and joint systems where required by other Sections of this code.

722.7.1 Minimum required protection. Where required by Sections 602.4.1 through 602.4.3, noncombustible protection shall be provided for mass timber building elements in accordance with Table 722.7.1(1). The rating, in minutes, contributed by the noncombustible protection of mass timber building elements, components or assemblies, shall be established in accordance with Section 703.6. The protection contributions indicated in Table 722.7.1(2) shall be deemed to comply with this requirement where installed and fastened in accordance with Section 722.7.2.
This Section should be considered as a companion to Section 602.4. Section 703.6 outlines a testing protocol to determine the contribution of noncombustible protection.

SBC 201 contains requirements for a minimum fire-resistance rating of each mass timber element, whether exposed, where permitted, or protected with noncombustible protection.

The noncombustible protection for mass timber in Types IV-A, B, and C construction serves to provide a minimum portion of the fire-resistance rating of the individual elements. Thus, Section 722.7 requires the fire-resistance rating to be established by determining the minimum contribution of noncombustible protection (for mass timber) and adding that contribution to fire resistance rating of the mass timber. This is similar to the manner in which building elements of other construction types are determined where protected with an additional material component.

The ICC Tall Wood Building Ad Hoc Committee determined that the noncombustible protection, where required, must provide at least two-thirds of the minimum required building element fire-resistance rating. In other words, even where noncombustible protection is required, mass timber members are allowed to contribute toward the fire-resistance rating. Where unprotected, the mass timber is required to provide the full fire-resistance rating required in Chapter 6. This applies to all mass timber elements regardless of the method by which the mass timber fire-resistance rating was determined.

See Table 722.7.1(1).

This Table correlates the required fire-resistance rating of building element per Table 601 and Table 705.5 with the minimum protection required from noncombustible protection. Also see the commentary to Section 722.7.1.

See Table 722.7.1(2).

This Table correlates the type of the noncombustible protection with the protection contribution. Also see the commentary to Section 722.7.1.

722.7.2 Installation of gypsum board noncombustible protection. Gypsum board complying with Table 722.7.1(2) shall be installed in accordance with this section.

This Section allows the user to select a prescriptive solution utilizing Type X gypsum wallboard, which is deemed to comply with the basic requirements of this Section and those of Section 602.4. Since this is a prescriptive solution, conditions of use such as attachment, finishing and edge treatment when bordering exposed mass timber areas are also included in this section.

===== Page 0665 =====
Section 703.6 forms the performance path for this determination and is the basis by which the contribution of noncombustible protection to the fire-resistance rating is determined. Testing of beams, columns, walls and ceiling panels has been used to establish the values found in Table 722.7.1(2) for 12.5 mm Type X- and 16-mm Type X gypsum board.

This Section is applicable when the prescriptive contribution of noncombustible protection is specified in Table 722.7.1(2). When the noncombustible protection is based on testing in Section 703.6, the installation requirements for noncombustible protection from Section 703.6 shall be used.

722.7.2.1 Interior surfaces. Layers of Type X gypsum board serving as noncombustible protection for interior surfaces of wall and ceiling assemblies determined in accordance with Table 722.7.1(1) shall be installed in accordance with the following:

1 Each layer shall be attached with Type S drywall screws of sufficient length to penetrate the mass timber at least 25 mm when driven flush with the paper surface of the gypsum board.

Exception: The third layer, where determined necessary by Section 722.7, shall be permitted to be attached with 25 mm No. 6 Type S drywall screws to furring channels in accordance with AISI S220.

2 Screws for attaching the base layer shall be 300 mm on center in both directions.

3 Screws for each layer after the base layer shall be 300 mm on center in both directions and offset from the screws of the previous layers by 100 mm in both directions.

4 All panel edges of any layer shall be offset 450 mm from those of the previous layer.

5 All panel edges shall be attached with screws sized and offset as in Items 1 through 4 and placed at least 25 mm but not more than 50 mm from the panel edge.

6 All panels installed at wall-to-ceiling intersections shall be installed such that ceiling panels are installed first and the wall panels are installed after the ceiling panel has been installed and is fitted tight to the ceiling panel. Where multiple layers are required, each layer shall repeat this process.

7 All panels installed at a wall-to-wall intersection shall be installed such that the panels covering an exterior wall or a wall with a greater fire-resistance rating shall be installed first and the panels covering the other wall shall be fitted tight to the panel covering the first wall. Where multiple layers are required, each layer shall repeat this process.

8 Panel edges of the face layer shall be taped and finished with joint compound. Fastener heads shall be covered with joint compound.

9 Panel edges protecting mass timber elements adjacent to unprotected mass timber elements in accordance with Section 602.4.2.2 shall be covered with 32 mm metal corner bead and finished with joint compound.

This Section states procedures for the prescriptive attachment and application requirements for noncombustible protection to mass timber elements.

For Item 1, the general requirements of Section 602.4 stipulate that all noncombustible layers be directly attached to the mass timber elements so that there are no concealed spaces.

The Exception to Item 1 allows the addition of a third layer separated from the base layers by a furring channel. This separation creates an airspace that, in association with the third layer of gypsum board, increases the fire-resistance rating time of the noncombustible protection of the mass timber elements.

Item 4 is intended to ensure that the joints of gypsum board panels are not aligned through the entire thickness of the gypsum board protection assembly. This serves to mitigate the passage of flame or hot gases from penetrating through the gypsum board joints to the mass timber.

Item 5 is designed to prevent the gypsum board from becoming prematurely loose (a.k.a., edge blowout) by ensuring a sufficient amount of the panel is supported by the fastener.

Item 6 in intended to ensure compliance with ASTM C840 and is necessary to provide perimeter support of the ceiling gypsum board during a fire.

Item 7 is intended to ensure compliance with ASTM C840 and is necessary to mitigate the flame or hot gases from penetrating through the corner joints to the mass timber.

Item 9 contains the minimum requirements for a metal corner bead or similar products to be installed to mitigate the passage of flame or hot gases from entering behind the gypsum board panels at that location.

This Section does not prohibit the installation of additional acceptable coverings or decorative trim materials for aesthetic purposes.

722.7.2.2 Exterior surfaces. Layers of Type X gypsum board serving as noncombustible protection for the outside of the exterior mass

===== Page 0666 =====
timber walls determined in accordance with Table 722.7.1(1) shall be fastened 300 mm on center each way and 150 mm on center at all joints or ends. All panel edges shall be attached with fasteners located at least 25 mm but not more than 50 mm from the panel edge. Fasteners shall comply with one of the following:

1 Galvanized nails of minimum 12 gage with a 11 mm head of sufficient length to penetrate the mass timber a minimum of 25 mm.

2 Screws that comply with ASTM C1002 (Type S, W or G) of sufficient length to penetrate the mass timber a minimum of 25 mm.

Like Section 722.7.2.1, these prescriptive requirements are designed to ensure that the gypsum board is installed so as to mitigate the passage of flame and hot gases from penetrating through the gypsum board joints to the mass timber. The requirements for the fastener spacing are designed to prevent the gypsum board from becoming prematurely loose (a.k.a., edge blowout) by ensuring a sufficient amount of the panel is supported by the fastener. Because these installations are on the exterior (weather) side of the building, envelope the fasteners are to be corrosion resistant.

===== Page 0667 =====
## TABLES AND FIGURES OF CHAPTER 7

TABLE 705.2

MINIMUM DISTANCE OF PROJECTION

<table>FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE-FSD (mm)MINIMUM DISTANCE FROM LINE USED TO DETERMINE FSD0 to less than 600Projections not permitted600 to less than 900600 mm900 to less than 1500Two-thirds of FSD1500 or greater1000 mm</table>

TABLE 705.5

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTERIOR WALLS BASED ON FIRE
SEPERATION DISTANCE \( ^{a,d,g} \)

<table>FIRE DISTANCE X (meters)TYPE OF CONSTRUCTIONGROUP H \( ^{e} \)GROUP F-1, M, S-1 \( ^{f} \)GROUP A, B, E, F-2, I, R \( ^{i} \) , S-2, U \( ^{h} \)X &lt; 1.5 \( ^{b} \)All321<td rowspan="2">1.5  \( \leq \)  X &lt; 3IA, IVA321Others211<td rowspan="3">3  \( \leq \)  X &lt; 9IA, IB, IVA, IVB211 \( ^{c} \)IIB, VB100Others111 \( ^{c} \)X  \( \geq \)  9All000</table>

a. Load-bearing exterior walls shall also comply with the fire-resistance rating requirements of Table 601.

b. See Section 706.1.1 for party walls.

c. Open parking garages complying with Section 406 shall not be required to have a fire-resistance rating.

d. The fire-resistance rating of an exterior wall is determined based upon the fire separation distance of the exterior wall and the story in which the wall is located.

e. For special requirements for Group H occupancies, see Section 415.6.

f. For special requirements for Group S aircraft hangars, see Section 412.3.1.

g. Where Table 705.8 permits non-bearing exterior walls with unlimited area of unprotected openings, the required fire-resistance rating for the exterior walls is 0 hours.

h. For a building containing only a Group U occupancy private garage or carport, the exterior wall shall not be required to have a fire-resistance rating where the fire separation distance is 1.5 meters or greater.

i. For a Group R-3 building of Type II-B or Type V-B construction, the exterior wall shall not be required to have a fire-resistance rating where the fire separation distance is 1.5 m or greater.

===== Page 0668 =====
TABLE 705.8

MAXIMUM AREA OF EXTERIOR WALL OPENINGS BASED ON FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE AND DEGREE OF OPENING PROTECTION

<table>FIRE DISTANCE (meter)SEPARATIONDEGREE OF OPENING PROTECTIONALLOWABLE AREA a<td rowspan="3">0 to less than 0.9b,c,kUnprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)Not Permitted kUnprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)Not Permitted kProtected (P)Not Permitted k<td rowspan="3">0.9 to less than 1.5d,eUnprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)Not PermittedUnprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)15%Protected (P)15%<td rowspan="3">1.5 to less than 3e,f,gUnprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)10% hUnprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)25%Protected (P)25%<td rowspan="3">3 to less than 4.5g,hUnprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)15% hUnprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)45%Protected (P)45%<td rowspan="3">4.5 to less than 6gUnprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)25%Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)75%Protected (P)75%<td rowspan="3">6 to less than 7.5f,gUnprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)45%Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)No LimitProtected (P)No Limit<td rowspan="3">7.5 to less than 9f,gUnprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)70%Unprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)No LimitProtected (P)No Limit<td rowspan="3">9 or greaterUnprotected, Nonsprinklered (UP, NS)No LimitUnprotected, Sprinklered (UP, S)No LimitProtected (P)No Limit</table>

UP, NS = Unprotected openings in buildings not equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1

UP, S = Unprotected openings in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

P = Openings protected with an opening protective assembly in accordance with Section 705.8.2.

a. Values indicated are the percentage of the area of the exterior wall, per story.

b. For the requirements for fire walls of buildings with differing heights, see Section 706.6.1.

c. For openings in a fire wall for buildings on the same lot, see Section 706.8.

d. The maximum percentage of unprotected and protected openings shall be 25 percent for Group R-3 occupancies.

e. Unprotected openings shall not be permitted for openings with a fire separation distance of less than 4.5 meter for Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies.

f. The area of unprotected and protected openings shall not be limited for Group R-3 occupancies, with a fire separation distance of 1.5 meter or greater.

g. The area of openings in an open parking structure with a fire separation distance of 3 meter or greater shall not be limited.

h. Includes buildings accessory to Group R-3.

i. Not applicable to Group H-1, H-2 and H-3 occupancies.

j. The area of openings in a building containing only a Group U occupancy private garage or carport with a fire separation distance of 1.5 m or greater shall not be limited.

k. For openings between S-2 parking garage and Group R-2 building, see Section 705.3, Exception 2.

TABLE 706.4

FIRE WALL FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS

<table>GROUPFIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)A, B, E, H-4, I, R-1, R-2, U3ab3F-1, H-3, H-5, M, S-13H-1, H-24bF-2, S-2, R-3, R-42</table>

a. In Type II or V construction, walls shall be permitted to have a 2-hour fire-resistance rating.

b. For Group H-1, H-2 or H-3 buildings, also see Sections 415.7 and 415.8

===== Page 0669 =====
TABLE 707.3.10

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING REQUIREMENTS FOR FIRE BARRIER ASSEMBLIES OR HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLIES BETWEEN FIRE AREAS

<table>OCCUPANCY GROUPFIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)H-1, H-24F-1, H-3, S-13A, B, E, F-2, H-4, H-5, I, M, R, S-22U1</table>

TABLE 716.1(1)

MARKING FIRE-RATED GLAZING ASSEMBLIES

<table>FIRE STANDARDMARKINGDEFINITION OF MARKINGASTM E 119 or UL 263WMeets wall assembly criteria.ASTM E 119 or UL 263FCMeets floor/ceiling criteria \( ^{a} \)NFPA 257 or UL 9OHMeets fire window assembly criteria including the hose stream test.NFPA 252 or UL 10B or UL 10CD H TMeets fire door assembly criteria. Meets fire door assembly hose stream test. Meets 232°C temperature rise criteria for 30 minsXXXThe time in minutes of the fire resistance or fire protection rating of the glazing assembly.</table>

a. See Section 2409.1

===== Page 0670 =====
TABLE 716.1(2)

OPENING FIRE PROTECTION ASSEMBLIES, RATINGS AND MARKINGS

<table><td rowspan="2">TYPE OF ASSEMBLY<td rowspan="2">REQUIRED WALL ASSEMBLY RATING (hours)<td rowspan="2">MINIMUM FIRE DOOR AND FIRE SHUTTER ASSEMBLY RATING (hours)<td rowspan="2">DOOR AND FIRE VISION PANEL SIZE a<td rowspan="2">FIRE-RATED GLAZING MARKING DOOR VISION PANEL b,c<td colspan="2">MINIMUM SIDELIGHT/ TRANSMITTING (hours)<td colspan="2">FIRE-RATED GLAZING MARKING SIDELIGHT/ TRANSMITTING (hours)Fire protectionFire protectionFire protectionFire protection<td rowspan="3">Fire walls and fire barriers having a required fire resistance rating greater than 1 hour43See Note aD-H-W-240Not Permitted4Not PermittedW-24033dSee Note aD-H-W-180Not Permitted3Not PermittedW-18021½64,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90 &gt;64,500 mm² = D-H-W-90Not Permitted2Not PermittedW-1201½1½64,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90 &gt;64,500 mm² = D-H-W-90Not Permitted1½Not PermittedW-90Single-wall assembly rating (hours)Each wall of the double-wall assembly (hours)——————Double fire walls constructed accordance NFPA 221in43See Note aD-H-W-180Not Permitted3Not Permittedwith321½≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted1Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted21164,500 mm²≤64,500 mm² = D-H-90Not Permitted2Not Permitted

===== Page 0671 =====
TABLE 716.1 (2)

CONTINUED OPENING FIRE PROTECTION ASSEMBLIES, RATINGS AND MARKINGS

<table><td rowspan="2">TYPE OF ASSEMBLY<td rowspan="2">REQUIRED WALL ASSEMBLY RATING (hours)<td rowspan="2">MINIMUM FIRE DOOR AND FIRE SHUTTER ASSEMBLY RATING (hours)<td rowspan="2">DOOR VISION PANEL SIZEa<td rowspan="2">FIRE-RATED GLAZING MARKING DOOR RATING PANELb,c<td rowspan="2">MINIMUM SIDELIGHT/ TRANSM ASSEMBLY RATING (hours)<td rowspan="2">FIRE-RATED GLAZING MARKING SIDELIGHT/TRANSM PANEL<td colspan="3">FIRE-RATED GLAZING MARKING SIDELIGHT/TRANSM PANELFire protectionFire resistanceFire protection<td rowspan="4">Exterior walls31½64,500 mm²a≤64,500 mm²=D-H-90Not Permitted3Not PermittedW-18021½Maximum size testedD-H-90 or D-H-W-901½2D-H-OH-90hW-12013/4Maximum size testedD-H-453/42D-H-OH-90hW-120Smoke barriers11/3Maximum size testedD-203/4D-H-OH-45</table>

a. Fire-resistance-rated glazing tested to ASTM E119 in accordance with Section 716.1.2.3 shall be permitted, in the maximum size tested.

b. Under the column heading “Fire-rated glazing marking door vision panel,” W refers to the fire-resistance rating of the glazing, not the frame.

c. See Section 716.1.2.2.1 and Table 716.1(1) for additional permitted markings.

d. Two doors, each with a fire protection rating of 11/2 hours, installed on opposite sides of the same opening in a fire wall, shall be deemed equivalent in fire protection rating to one 3-hour fire door.

e. As required in Section 706.4.

f. As allowed in Section 4.6 of NFPA 221.

g. See Section 716.2.5.1.2.

h. Fire-protection-rated glazing is not permitted for fire barriers required by Section 1207 of SBC 801 to enclose energy storage systems. Fire-resistance-rated glazing assembles tested to ASTM E119 or UL 263, as specified in Section 716.1.2.3, shall be permitted.

i. Two doors, each with a fire rating of 20 minutes, installed on opposite sides of the same opening in a fire partition, shall be deemed equivalent in fire protection rating to one 45-minute fire door.

===== Page 0672 =====
TABLE 716.1 (3)

FIRE WINDOW ASSEMBLY FIRE PROTECTION RATINGS

<table>TYPE ASSEMBLYOF WALLREQUIRED WALL ASSEMBLY RATING (hours)MINIMUM FIRE WINDOW ASSEMBLY RATING (hours)FIRE-RATED GLAZING MARKING<td colspan="5">Interior wallsFire wallsAllNP \( ^{a} \)W-XXX \( ^{b} \)<td rowspan="2">Fire barriers&gt;ch1NP \( ^{a} \)W-XXX \( ^{b} \)1NP \( ^{a} \)W-XXX \( ^{b} \)<td rowspan="2">Atrium separations (Section 707.3.6), Incidental use areas (Section 707.3.7) \( ^{c} \) , Mixed occupancy separations (Section 707.3.9)13/4OH-45 or W-6013/4OH-45 or W-60<td rowspan="2">Fire partitions0.51/3OH-20 or W-30Smoke barriers13/4OH-45 or W-60<td rowspan="3">Exterior walls&gt;11/2OH-90 or W-XXX \( ^{b} \)13/4OH-45 or W-600.51/3OH-20 or W-30Party wallAllNPNot Applicable</table>

NP = Not Permitted.

a. Not permitted except fire-resistance-rated glazing assemblies tested to ASTM E 119 or UL 263, as specified in Section 716.1.2.3.

b. XXX = The fire rating duration period in minutes, which shall be equal to the fire-resistance rating required for the wall assembly.

c. Fire-protection-rated glazing is not permitted for fire barriers required by Section 1207 of SBC 801 to enclose energy storage systems. Fire-resistance-rated glazing assemblies tested to ASTM E119 or UL 263, as specified in Section 716.1.2.3, shall be permitted.

TABLE 717.3.2.1

FIRE DAMPER RATING

<table>TYPE OF PENETRATIONMINIMUM DAMPER RATING (hours)Less than 3-hour fire-resistance-rated assemblies1.53-hour or greater fire-resistance-rated assemblies3</table>

===== Page 0673 =====
CHAPTER 7 - FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="12">MINIMUM ROUTE CUTION OF STRUCTURAL RAILS BASED ON TIME PERIODS FOR VARIOUS NONCONSTITUENT INSULATINGSTRUCTURAL PARTS TO PROTECTEDITEM NUMBERINSULATING MATERIAL LISTEDMINIMAL TEMPERATURE OF THE STRUCTURAL PERIODS (unlimited)1 hour 1 hour 2 hours 3 hours1 hour 1 hour 2 hours 3 hours1 hour 1 hour 2 hours 3 hours1 hour 1 hour 2 hours 3 hours1 hour 1 hour 2 hours 3 hours1 hour 1 hour 2 hours 3 hours1 hour 1 hour 2 hours 3 hours1 hour 1 hour 2 hours 3 hours1. Steel columns and all of primary houses1.1.6Siliceous aggregate concrete and concrete excluded in Item 1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.1.

===== Page 0674 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">MINIMUM PROTECTION OF STRUCTURAL PARTS BASED ON STRICT PARTIAL FIRE-RATED SMOKE PROPERTIESSTRUCTURAL PARTSBEITEM NUMBERINSTALLATION MATERIAL USEDMINIMUM THICKNESS OF INSTALLATING MATERIAL FOR THE FOLLOWING FIRE RESISTANCE PERIODS (millimeters)1 hour 1 hour 2 hours 3 hours 4 hours 5 hours 6 hours 7 hours 8 hours 9 hours 10 hours 11 hours 12 hours 13 hours 14 hours 15 hours 16 hours 17 hours 18 hours 19 hours 20 hours 21 hours 22 hours 23 hours 24 hours 25 hours 26 hours 27 hours 28 hours 29 hours 30 hours 31 hours 32 hours 33 hours 34 hours 35 hours 36 hours 37 hours 38 hours 39 hours 40 hours 41 hours 42 hours 43 hours 44 hours 45 hours 46 hours 47 hours 48 hours 49 hours 50 hours 51 hours 52 hours 53 hours 54 hours 55 hours 56 hours 57 hours 58 hours 59 hours 60 hours 61 hours 62 hours 63 hours 64 hours 65 hours 66 hours 67 hours 68 hours 69 hours 70 hours 71 hours 72 hours 73 hours 74 hours 75 hours 76 hours 77 hours 78 hours 79 hours 80 hours 81 hours 82 hours 83 hours 84 hours 85 hours 86 hours 87 hours 88 hours 89 hours 90 hours 91 hours 92 hours 93 hours 94 hours 95 hours 96 hours 97 hours 98 hours 99 hours 100 hours 101 hours 102 hours 103 hours 104 hours 105 hours 106 hours 107 hours 108 hours 109 hours 110 hours 111 hours 112 hours 113 hours 114 hours 115 hours 116 hours 117 hours 118 hours 119 hours 120 hours 121 hours 122 hours 123 hours 124 hours 125 hours 126 hours 127 hours 128 hours 129 hours 130 hours 131 hours 132 hours 133 hours 134 hours 135 hours 136 hours 137 hours 138 hours 139 hours 140 hours 141 hours 142 hours 143 hours 144 hours 145 hours 146 hours 147 hours 148 hours 149 hours 150 hours 151 hours 152 hours 153 hours 154 hours 155 hours 156 hours 157 hours 158 hours 159 hours 160 hours 161 hours 162 hours 163 hours 164 hours 165 hours 166 hours 167 hours 168 hours 169 hours 170 hours 171 hours 172 hours 173 hours 174 hours 175 hours 176 hours 177 hours 178 hours 179 hours 180 hours 181 hours 182 hours 183 hours 184 hours 185 hours 186 hours 187 hours 188 hours 189 hours 190 hours 191 hours 192 hours 193 hours 194 hours 195 hours 196 hours 197 hours 198 hours 199 hours 200 hours 201 hours 202 hours 203 hours 204 hours 205 hours 206 hours 207 hours 208 hours 209 hours 210 hours 211 hours 212 hours 213 hours 214 hours 215 hours 216 hours 217 hours 218 hours 219 hours 220 hours 221 hours 222 hours 223 hours 224 hours 225 hours 226 hours 227 hours 228 hours 229 hours 230 hours 231 hours 232 hours 233 hours 234 hours 235 hours 236 hours 237 hours 238 hours 239 hours 240 hours 241 hours 242 hours 243 hours 244 hours 245 hours 246 hours 247 hours 248 hours 249 hours 250 hours 251 hours 252 hours 253 hours 254 hours 255 hours 256 hours 257 hours 258 hours 259 hours 260 hours 261 hours 262 hours 263 hours 264 hours 265 hours 266 hours 267 hours 268 hours 269 hours 270 hours 271 hours 272 hours 273 hours 274 hours 275 hours 276 hours 277 hours 278 hours 279 hours 280 hours 281 hours 282 hours 283 hours 284 hours 285 hours 286 hours 287 hours 288 hours 289 hours 290 hours 291 hours 292 hours 293 hours 294 hours 295 hours 296 hours 297 hours 298 hours 299 hours 300 hours 301 hours 302 hours 303 hours 304 hours 305 hours 306 hours 307 hours 308 hours 309 hours 310 hours 311 hours 312 hours 313 hours 314 hours 315 hours 316 hours 317 hours 318 hours 319 hours 320 hours 321 hours 322 hours 323 hours 324 hours 325 hours 326 hours 327 hours 328 hours 329 hours 330 hours 331 hours 332 hours 333 hours 334 hours 335 hours 336 hours 337 hours 338 hours 339 hours 340 hours 341 hours 342 hours 343 hours 344 hours 345 hours 346 hours 347 hours 348 hours 349 hours 350 hours 351 hours 352 hours 353 hours 354 hours 355 hours 356 hours 357 hours 358 hours 359 hours 360 hours 361 hours 362 hours 363 hours 364 hours 365 hours 366 hours 367 hours 368 hours 369 hours 370 hours 371 hours 372 hours 373 hours 374 hours 375 hours 376 hours 377 hours 378 hours 379 hours 380 hours 381 hours 382 hours 383 hours 384 hours 385 hours 386 hours 387 hours 388 hours 389 hours 390 hours 391 hours 392 hours 393 hours 394 hours 395 hours 396 hours 397 hours 398 hours 399 hours 400 hours 401 hours 402 hours 403 hours 404 hours 405 hours 406 hours 407 hours 408 hours 409 hours 410 hours 411 hours 412 hours 413 hours 414 hours 415 hours 416 hours 417 hours 418 hours 419 hours 420 hours 421 hours 422 hours 423 hours 424 hours 425 hours 426 hours 427 hours 428 hours 429 hours 430 hours 431 hours 432 hours 433 hours 434 hours 435 hours 436 hours 437 hours 438 hours 439 hours 440 hours 441 hours 442 hours 443 hours 444 hours 445 hours 446 hours 447 hours 448 hours 449 hours 450 hours 451 hours 452 hours 453 hours 454 hours 455 hours 456 hours 457 hours 458 hours 459 hours 460 hours 461 hours 462 hours 463 hours 464 hours 465 hours 466 hours 467 hours 468 hours 469 hours 470 hours 471 hours 472 hours 473 hours 474 hours 475 hours 476 hours 477 hours 478 hours 479 hours 480 hours 481 hours 482 hours 483 hours 484 hours 485 hours 486 hours 487 hours 488 hours 489 hours 490 hours 491 hours 492 hours 493 hours 494 hours 495 hours 496 hours 497 hours 498 hours 499 hours 500 hours 501 hours 502 hours 503 hours 504 hours 505 hours 506 hours 507 hours 508 hours 509 hours 510 hours 511 hours 512 hours 513 hours 514 hours 515 hours 516 hours 517 hours 518 hours 519 hours 520 hours 521 hours 522 hours 523 hours 524 hours 525 hours 526 hours 527 hours 528 hours 529 hours 530 hours 531 hours 532 hours 533 hours 534 hours 535 hours 536 hours 537 hours 538 hours 539 hours 540 hours 541 hours 542 hours 543 hours 544 hours 545 hours 546 hours 547 hours 548 hours 549 hours 550 hours 551 hours 552 hours 553 hours 554 hours 555 hours 556 hours 557 hours 558 hours 559 hours 560 hours 561 hours 562 hours 563 hours 564 hours 565 hours 566 hours 567 hours 568 hours 569 hours 570 hours 571 hours 572 hours 573 hours 574 hours 575 hours 576 hours 577 hours 578 hours 579 hours 580 hours 581 hours 582 hours 583 hours 584 hours 585 hours 586 hours 587 hours 588 hours 589 hours 590 hours 591 hours 592 hours 593 hours 594 hours 595 hours 596 hours 597 hours 598 hours 599 hours 600 hours 601 hours 602 hours 603 hours 604 hours 605 hours 606 hours 607 hours 608 hours 609 hours 610 hours 611 hours 612 hours 613 hours 614 hours 615 hours 616 hours 617 hours 618 hours 619 hours 620 hours 621 hours 622 hours 623 hours 624 hours 625 hours 626 hours 627 hours 628 hours 629 hours 630 hours 631 hours 632 hours 633 hours 634 hours 635 hours 636 hours 637 hours 638 hours 639 hours 640 hours 641 hours 642 hours 643 hours 644 hours 645 hours 646 hours 647 hours 648 hours 649 hours 650 hours 651 hours 652 hours 653 hours 654 hours 655 hours 656 hours 657 hours 658 hours 659 hours 660 hours 661 hours 662 hours 663 hours 664 hours 665 hours 666 hours 667 hours 668 hours 669 hours 670 hours 671 hours 672 hours 673 hours 674 hours 675 hours 676 hours 677 hours 678 hours 679 hours 680 hours 681 hours 682 hours 683 hours 684 hours 685 hours 686 hours 687 hours 688 hours 689 hours 690 hours 691 hours 692 hours 693 hours 694 hours 695 hours 696 hours 697 hours 698 hours 699 hours 700 hours 701 hours 702 hours 703 hours 704 hours 705 hours 706 hours 707 hours 708 hours 709 hours 710 hours 711 hours 712 hours 713 hours 714 hours 715 hours 716 hours 717 hours 718 hours 719 hours 720 hours 721 hours 722 hours 723 hours 724 hours 725 hours 726 hours 727 hours 728 hours 729 hours 730 hours 731 hours 732 hours 733 hours 734 hours 735 hours 736 hours 737 hours 738 hours 739 hours 740 hours 741 hours 742 hours 743 hours 744 hours 745 hours 746 hours 747 hours 748 hours 749 hours 750 hours 751 hours 752 hours 753 hours 754 hours 755 hours 756 hours 757 hours 758 hours 759 hours 760 hours 761 hours 762 hours 763 hours 764 hours 765 hours 766 hours 767 hours 768 hours 769 hours 770 hours 771 hours 772 hours 773 hours 774 hours 775 hours 776 hours 777 hours 778 hours 779 hours 780 hours 781 hours 782 hours 783 hours 784 hours 785 hours 786 hours 787 hours 788 hours 789 hours 790 hours 791 hours 792 hours 793 hours 794 hours 795 hours 796 hours 797 hours 798 hours 799 hours 800 hours 801 hours 802 hours 803 hours 804 hours 805 hours 806 hours 807 hours 808 hours 809 hours 810 hours 811 hours 812 hours 813 hours 814 hours 815 hours 816 hours 817 hours 818 hours 819 hours 820 hours 821 hours 822 hours 823 hours 824 hours 825 hours 826 hours 827 hours 828 hours 829 hours 830 hours 831 hours 832 hours 833 hours 834 hours 835 hours 836 hours 837 hours 838 hours 839 hours 840 hours 841 hours 842 hours 843 hours 844 hours 845 hours 846 hours 847 hours 848 hours 849 hours 850 hours 851 hours 852 hours 853 hours 854 hours 855 hours 856 hours 857 hours 858 hours 859 hours 860 hours 861 hours 862 hours 863 hours 864 hours 865 hours 866 hours 867 hours 868 hours 869 hours 870 hours 871 hours 872 hours 873 hours 874 hours 875 hours 876 hours 877 hours 878 hours 879 hours 880 hours 881 hours 882 hours 883 hours 884 hours 885 hours 886 hours 887 hours 888 hours 889 hours 890 hours 891 hours 892 hours 893 hours 894 hours 895 hours 896 hours 897 hours 898 hours 899 hours 900 hours 901 hours 902 hours 903 hours 904 hours 905 hours 906 hours 907 hours 908 hours 909 hours 910 hours 911 hours 912 hours 913 hours 914 hours 915 hours 916 hours 917 hours 918 hours 919 hours 920 hours 921 hours 922 hours 923 hours 924 hours 925 hours 926 hours 927 hours 928 hours 929 hours 930 hours 931 hours 932 hours 933 hours 934 hours 935 hours 936 hours 937 hours 938 hours 939 hours 940 hours

===== Page 0675 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTEIN FUSIONS

<table><td colspan="11">MINIMUM PROJECTION OF STRICTURAL PARTS BASED ON STRICTURAL PARTSSTRUCTURAL PARTSBEITEM NUMBERINSTALLATION MATERIAL USEDMINIMUM THICKNESS OF INSTALLATING MATERIAL FOR THE FOLLOWING FIRE RESISTANCE PERIODS (millimeters)1 hourPROTECTED

===== Page 0676 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTEIN FOUNDATIONS

MINIMUM PROTECTION OF STRUCTURAL PARTS BASED ON STRICTURAL PARTS (CONTINUED)

<table><td colspan="5">MINIMAL IMPACT USEDSTRUCTURAL PARTS TO PROTECTEDITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USEDMINIMUM THICKNESS OF INSTALLATION MATERIAL FOR THE FOLLOWING FIRE RESISTANCE PERIODS (millimeter)1. Steel columns and all of primary touches (continued)1.8.1Wood-fiber type framing, plaster, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate, 2 hours and 1 hour, 1:1 by weight gypsum-on-sand aggregate,

===== Page 0677 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROHIBITIONS

<table><td colspan="12">MINIMUM PROTECTION OF STRUCTURAL PARTS BASED ON STRICTURAL PARTS USED IN INSTALLATING MATERIAL FOR THE FOLLOWING FIRE-MATERIALSSTRUCTURAL PARTS TO PROTECTEDITEM NUMBERINSULATING MATERIAL USED2.1.1Carbonate, light weight and solid lightweight aggregate concrete (not including sand-mixed mortar)3 hours2 hours1 hour2.1.2graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.3graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.4graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.5graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.6graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.7graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.8graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.9graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.10graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.11graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.12graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.13graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.14graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.15graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.16graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.17graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.18graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.19graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.20graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.21graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.22graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.23graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.24graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.25graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.26graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.27graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.28graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.29graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.30graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.31graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.32graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.33graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.34graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.35graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.36graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.37graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.38graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.39graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.40graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.41graphite and silicon oxides (graphite) with 75 mm or finer metal mesh, placed 25 mm from the edge of steel reinforcement (not including metal mesh)504025252.1.42

===== Page 0678 =====
CHAPTER 7-FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">MINIMUM PROTECTION OF STRUCTURAL PARTS BASED ON STRICTURAL PARTSSTRUCTURAL PARTS TO PROTECTEDITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42 (Combined)2.43 (Combined)2.44 (Combined)2.45 (Combined)2.46 (Combined)2.47 (Combined)2.48 (Combined)BEITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USED2.41 (Combined)2.42

===== Page 0679 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTEIN FUSION

<table><td colspan="12">MINIMUM PROJECTION OF STRICTURAL PARTS TO INJUNCTION OF STRICTURAL PARTS BASED ON TIME PERIODS FOR VARIOUS NONCONTRIBUTABLE INSTALLATING MATERIALS<td colspan="12">INSTALLING MATERIALSSTRUCTURAL PARTS TO BE PROTECTEDITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USEDMANDATORY FIRE RATING MATERIAFOR THE FOLLOWING FIRE RESPONSE PERIODS1 hour2 hours3 hours4 hours5 hours6 hours7 hours3. Bonded reinforcement in pretreated concrete3-111Concrete, lightweight, sand-lithweight and siliceous aggregate concrete Bema or gravels100%75%6540254. Bonded or unbound post-tensioned tendons in prestressed concrete4-111Concrete, lightweight, sand-lithweight and siliceous aggregate concrete U-braced members100%5040255. Reinforcing steel in reinforced concrete columns, beams or girders5-111Bend radius 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300 mm wide or greater, 300

===== Page 0680 =====
CHAPTER 7 – FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION OF STRUCTURAL PARTIES

<table>STRUCTURAL PARTIES TO BE PROTECTEDITEM NUMBERINSTALLING MATERIAL USEDMATERIAL FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT PARTIES BASED ON THE FIRE-RESISTANT

===== Page 0681 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="12">TABLE 7.1.12(a)<td colspan="12">MINIMUM FIRE RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PARTITIONS, a, pMATERIALITEM NUMBERCONSTRUCTION1 hour to 10 years (millimeter)2 hours1 hour1 hour1 hour1 hour1 hour1 hour1 hour1. Brick of clay or shale1.1.1Solid brick of clay12595709570957095701.1.21.1.2Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.31.1.3Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.41.1.4Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.51.1.5Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.61.1.6Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.71.1.7Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.81.1.8Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.91.1.9Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.101.1.10Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.111.1.11Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.121.1.12Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.131.1.13Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.141.1.14Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.151.1.15Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.161.1.16Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.171.1.17Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.181.1.18Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.191.1.19Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.201.1.20Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.211.1.21Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.221.1.22Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.231.1.23Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.241.1.24Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.251.1.25Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.261.1.26Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.271.1.27Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.281.1.28Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.291.1.29Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.301.1.30Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.311.1.31Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.321.1.32Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.331.1.33Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.341.1.34Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.351.1.35Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.361.1.36Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.371.1.37Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.381.1.38Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.391.1.39Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.401.1.40Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.411.1.41Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.421.1.42Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.431.1.43Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.441.1.44Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.451.1.45Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.461.1.46Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.471.1.47Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.481.1.48Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.491.1.49Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.501.1.50Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.511.1.51Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.521.1.52Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.531.1.53Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.541.1.54Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.551.1.55Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.561.1.56Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.571.1.57Solid brick of clay125110851108511085110851.1.

===== Page 0682 =====
CHAPTER 7 – FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="12">RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PARTITIONS, % of RATIOMATERIALITEM NUMBERCONSTRUCTION5. Glazed or tougzied facing tile, non-laid bearing (Continuous)5-15On 100 mm unit corded 25 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster5-16On 100 mm unit corded 50 percent maximum with 20 mm vermiculite5-17On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm vermiculite5-18On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster5-19On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-11On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-12On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-13On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-14On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-15On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-16On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-17On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-18On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-19On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-20On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-21On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-22On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-23On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-24On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-25On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-26On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-27On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-28On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-29On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-30On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-31On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-32On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-33On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-34On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-35On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-36On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-37On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-38On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-39On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-40On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-41On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-42On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-43On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-44On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-45On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-46On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-47On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-48On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-49On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-50On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-51On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-52On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-53On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-54On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-55On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-56On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-57On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-58On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-59On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-60On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-61On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-62On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-63On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-64On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster6-65On 100 mm unit corded 30 percent maximum with 20 mm gypsum plaster

===== Page 0683 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">RAILED FIRE-RESTRICTIONMATERIALITEM NUMBERCONSTRUCTIONPermitted and permitted constructionPermitted constructionPermitted constructionPermitted constructionPermitted constructionPermitted constructionPermitted constructionPermitted construction7. Solid particle and Portland cement7.1.17.1.17.1.17.1.17.1.17.1.17.1.17.1.17.1.17.1.18. Solid neat wood fibered gypsum plaster8.1.18.1.18.1.18.1.18.1.18.1.18.1.18.1.18.1.18.1.19. Solid walnutwood partition9.1.19.1.19.1.19.1.19.1.19.1.19.1.19.1.19.1.19.1.110. Hollow gypsum walnutwood partition10.1.110.1.110.1.110.1.110.1.110.1.110.1.110.1.110.1.110.1.1</table>

===== Page 0684 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">RAILED FIRE-RESISTANCE FIREPROOF FLOOR (VARIOLES WALLS AND PAVEMENTS)MATERIALITEM NUMBERCONSTRUCTION11.1.111.1.211.1.311.1.411.1.511.1.611.1.711.1.811.1.911.1. Noncombustible sub-structure partition plaster each side11.1.185&#x27; x 1 mm (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No. 1) x 4 inch x 8 inch x 2 inches (No.

===== Page 0685 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">RAILED FIRE-RESISTANCE FIREPROOF FLOOR 1 YEAR 7.1.2.1.2)MATERIALITEM NUMBERCONSTRUCTION4 hours2 hours1 hour1 hour1 hour1 hour1 hour1 hour12. Wood studs—interior partition with plaster each side12.1.1.a50 to 100 pounds per foot on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4 nails on metal half. Attached by 4 common nails bent over or No. 4

===== Page 0686 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="12">TABLE 7.12(2)<td colspan="12">RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIOD FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PARTITIONS 4.0, FACE, (millimeter)MATERIALITEM NUMBERCONSTRUCTIONmm (O.T. 25 carbon basted steel, 6-gage) channel sloped studs 600 mm to 1.0-AcC, (millimeter) 4.0, FACE, (millimeter) 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 6.0, 7.0, 8.0, 9.0, 10.0, 11.0, 12.0, 13.0, 14.0, 15.0, 16.0, 17.0, 18.0, 19.0, 20.0, 21.0, 22.0, 23.0, 24.0, 25.0, 26.0, 27.0, 28.0, 29.0, 30.0, 31.0, 32.0, 33.0, 34.0, 35.0, 36.0, 37.0, 38.0, 39.0, 40.0, 41.0, 42.0, 43.0, 44.0, 45.0, 46.0, 47.0, 48.0, 49.0, 50.0, 51.0, 52.0, 53.0, 54.0, 55.0, 56.0, 57.0, 58.0, 59.0, 60.0, 61.0, 62.0, 63.0, 64.0, 65.0, 66.0, 67.0, 68.0, 69.0, 70.0, 71.0, 72.0, 73.0, 74.0, 75.0, 76.0, 77.0, 78.0, 79.0, 80.0, 81.0, 82.0, 83.0, 84.0, 85.0, 86.0, 87.0, 88.0, 89.0, 90.0, 91.0, 92.0, 93.0, 94.0, 95.0, 96.0, 97.0, 98.0, 99.0, 100.0, 101.0, 102.0, 103.0, 104.0, 105.0, 106.0, 107.0, 108.0, 109.0, 110.0, 111.0, 112.0, 113.0, 114.0, 115.0, 116.0, 117.0, 118.0, 119.0, 120.0, 121.0, 122.0, 123.0, 124.0, 125.0, 126.0, 127.0, 128.0, 129.0, 130.0, 131.0, 132.0, 133.0, 134.0, 135.0, 136.0, 137.0, 138.0, 139.0, 140.0, 141.0, 142.0, 143.0, 144.0, 145.0, 146.0, 147.0, 148.0, 149.0, 150.0, 151.0, 152.0, 153.0, 154.0, 155.0, 156.0, 157.0, 158.0, 159.0, 160.0, 161.0, 162.0, 163.0, 164.0, 165.0, 166.0, 167.0, 168.0, 169.0, 170.0, 171.0, 172.0, 173.0, 174.0, 175.0, 176.0, 177.0, 178.0, 179.0, 180.0, 181.0, 182.0, 183.0, 184.0, 185.0, 186.0, 187.0, 188.0, 189.0, 190.0, 191.0, 192.0, 193.0, 194.0, 195.0, 196.0, 197.0, 198.0, 199.0, 200.0, 201.0, 202.0, 203.0, 204.0, 205.0, 206.0, 207.0, 208.0, 209.0, 210.0, 211.0, 212.0, 213.0, 214.0, 215.0, 216.0, 217.0, 218.0, 219.0, 220.0, 221.0, 222.0, 223.0, 224.0, 225.0, 226.0, 227.0, 228.0, 229.0, 230.0, 231.0, 232.0, 233.0, 234.0, 235.0, 236.0, 237.0, 238.0, 239.0, 240.0, 241.0, 242.0, 243.0, 244.0, 245.0, 246.0, 247.0, 248.0, 249.0, 250.0, 251.0, 252.0, 253.0, 254.0, 255.0, 256.0, 257.0, 258.0, 259.0, 260.0, 261.0, 262.0, 263.0, 264.0, 265.0, 266.0, 267.0, 268.0, 269.0, 270.0, 271.0, 272.0, 273.0, 274.0, 275.0, 276.0, 277.0, 278.0, 279.0, 280.0, 281.0, 282.0, 283.0, 284.0, 285.0, 286.0, 287.0, 288.0, 289.0, 290.0, 291.0, 292.0, 293.0, 294.0, 295.0, 296.0, 297.0, 298.0, 299.0, 300.0, 301.0, 302.0, 303.0, 304.0, 305.0, 306.0, 307.0, 308.0, 309.0, 310.0, 311.0, 312.0, 313.0, 314.0, 315.0, 316.0, 317.0, 318.0, 319.0, 320.0, 321.0, 322.0, 323.0, 324.0, 325.0, 326.0, 327.0, 328.0, 329.0, 330.0, 331.0, 332.0, 333.0, 334.0, 335.0, 336.0, 337.0, 338.0, 339.0, 340.0, 341.0, 342.0, 343.0, 344.0, 345.0, 346.0, 347.0, 348.0, 349.0, 350.0, 351.0, 352.0, 353.0, 354.0, 355.0, 356.0, 357.0, 358.0, 359.0, 360.0, 361.0, 362.0, 363.0, 364.0, 365.0, 366.0, 367.0, 368.0, 369.0, 370.0, 371.0, 372.0, 373.0, 374.0, 375.0, 376.0, 377.0, 378.0, 379.0, 380.0, 381.0, 382.0, 383.0, 384.0, 385.0, 386.0, 387.0, 388.0, 389.0, 390.0, 391.0, 392.0, 393.0, 394.0, 395.0, 396.0, 397.0, 398.0, 399.0, 400.0, 401.0, 402.0, 403.0, 404.0, 405.0, 406.0, 407.0, 408.0, 409.0, 410.0, 411.0, 412.0, 413.0, 414.0, 415.0, 416.0, 417.0, 418.0, 419.0, 420.0, 421.0, 422.0, 423.0, 424.0, 425.0, 426.0, 427.0, 428.0, 429.0, 430.0, 431.0, 432.0, 433.0, 434.0, 435.0, 436.0, 437.0, 438.0, 439.0, 440.0, 441.0, 442.0, 443.0, 444.0, 445.0, 446.0, 447.0, 448.0, 449.0, 450.0, 451.0, 452.0, 453.0, 454.0, 455.0, 456.0, 457.0, 458.0, 459.0, 460.0, 461.0, 462.0, 463.0, 464.0, 465.0, 466.0, 467.0, 468.0, 469.0, 470.0, 471.0, 472.0, 473.0, 474.0, 475.0, 476.0, 477.0, 478.0, 479.0, 480.0, 481.0, 482.0, 483.0, 484.0, 485.0, 486.0, 487.0, 488.0, 489.0, 490.0, 491.0, 492.0, 493.0, 494.0, 495.0, 496.0, 497.0, 498.0, 499.0, 500.0, 501.0, 502.0, 503.0, 504.0, 505.0, 506.0, 507.0, 508.0, 509.0, 510.0, 511.0, 512.0, 513.0, 514.0, 515.0, 516.0, 517.0, 518.0, 519.0, 520.0, 521.0, 522.0, 523.0, 524.0, 525.0, 526.0, 527.0, 528.0, 529.0, 530.0, 531.0, 532.0, 533.0, 534.0, 535.0, 536.0, 537.0, 538.0, 539.0, 540.0, 541.0, 542.0, 543.0, 544.0, 545.0, 546.0, 547.0, 548.0, 549.0, 550.0, 551.0, 552.0, 553.0, 554.0, 555.0, 556.0, 557.0, 558.0, 559.0

===== Page 0687 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">TABLE 7.12(1)<td colspan="11">RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PAVILIONS, a, pMATERIALITEM NUMBERCONSTRUCTION1,000 LBM1,000 LBM1,000 LBM1,000 LBM1,000 LBM1,000 LBM1,000 LBM1,000 LBM14. Wood studs-membrane partition, with wallpaper and each side (continued)14.1.1450 cm × 100 cm to 100 cm————————15. Exterior or interior walls15.1.12 a50 cm × 100 cm————————15. Exterior or interior walls15.1.12 a50 cm × 100 cm————————</table>

===== Page 0688 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">TABLE 7.12(2)<td colspan="11">RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PATIENT POSITIONS, % ofMATERIALITEM NUMBERCONSTRUCTION90 mm No. 16 gauge noncombustible subd. 400 mm non center with 2.2 mm cement mortar, 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to 1 hour to

===== Page 0689 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">TABLE 7.12(2)<td colspan="11">RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PAVILIONS, a, pMATERIALITEM NUMBERCONSTRUCTION10 mm x 15 cm10 mm x 15 cm10 mm x 15 cm10 mm x 15 cm10 mm x 15 cm10 mm x 15 cm10 mm x 15 cm10 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, a50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, b50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, c50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, d50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, e50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, f50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, g50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, h50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, i50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, j50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, k50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, l50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, m50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, n50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, o50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, p50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, q50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, r50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, s50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, t50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, u50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, v50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, w50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, x50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, y50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, z50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, aa50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, ab50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, ac50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, ad50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm15.1-1, ae50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm50 mm x 15 cm

===== Page 0690 =====
CHAPTER 7 – FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">TABLE 7.12.1(2)<td colspan="11">RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE FIREPROOF VARIOUSTIALS AND PATRONAGES FACET-TO-FACE (multimeter)MATERIALITEM NUMBERCONSTRUCTION100 mm No. 18 mm non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-absorbent non-

===== Page 0691 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">TABLE 7.12(2)<td colspan="11">RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PAVEMENTS, FACE-TO-EARTHMATERIALITEM NUMBERCONSTRUCTION50 mm x 50 mm wood studs at 400 mm with double top plates, single bottom and metal exterior sides covered with 16 mm Type X gypsum wallboard, edge, applied horizontally or vertically with vertically joints over studs, and 12 mm wide 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on center. Carry out 400 mm Type S drywall screws, spaced 300 mm on

===== Page 0692 =====
CHAPTER 7 – FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">TABLE 7.12.1(2) MINIMUM FIRE/SMOKE THICKNESS FACE-TO-FACE (millimeter)MATERIALITEM NUMBERCONSTRUCTION15-2-1a15-2-1b15-2-2a15-2-2b15-2-3a15-2-3b15-2-3c15-2-3dExterior interior walls (continued)</table>

===== Page 0693 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE ERECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="12">TABLE 7.1.2(2)<td colspan="12">RATED FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS FOR VARIOUS WALLS AND PARTITIONS, a, pMATERIALITEM NUMBERCONSTRUCTION50 mm x 100 mm wood studs at 400 mm centers with double top plates, single bottom panel, 12 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide, applied bottom panel, 1.2 mm wide,

===== Page 0694 =====
For all of the construction and disposal methods described in this table, gypsum has first been used to create the wall. The wall has been permitted to be constructed for gypsum wallboard, provided additional insulation is added to the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and the joints in the facade layer are reinforced and the entire surface is protected from moisture. The wallboard must be installed in a manner that is described for the wallboard, and

===== Page 0695 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="12">MINIMAL PROTECTION FOR FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM:<td colspan="12">THICKNESS OF FLOOR OR ROOF ROOF SURFACE (millimeter)ITEM NUMBERITEM NUMBERCELLING CONSTRUCTION4 hours3 hours2 hours1 hour1 hour1 hour1 hour1 hour1 hour1. Silicious aggregate concrete1-1.1Slab (not ceiling, minimum overstressed concrete)18016012590—————2. Carbonate aggregate concrete2.1.1Overstressed concrete, minimum overstressed concrete17014511580—————3. Sand-lift-weight concrete3.1.1Sand-lift-weight concrete1351159570—————4. Lightweight concrete4.1.1With structural gypsum plaster over metal raft attached to overstressed concrete1301109065—————5. Reinforced concrete5.1.1With structural gypsum plaster over metal raft attached to overstressed concrete7550———————</table>

===== Page 0696 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="5">ITEM NUMBER<td colspan="5">ITEM NUMBERFLOOR OR ROOF CONSTRUCTIONITEM NUMBERITEM NUMBERITEM NUMBERITEM NUMBERITEM NUMBERITEM NUMBERITEM NUMBERITEM NUMBERITEM NUMBER5. Reinforced concrete (continuous)5.21</table>

MINIMAL PROPORTION FOR FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEMS \( ^{a} \)

===== Page 0697 =====
CHAPTER 7 – FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">MINIMUM FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES OF FLOOR OR ROOF SYSTEM OF THICKNESS OF FLOOR AND ROOF ROOF SYSTEM OF FLOOR OR ROOF ROOF SYSTEM OF FLOOR OR ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF ROOF

===== Page 0698 =====
MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM

<table><td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="11">MATERIAL PROTEIN F

===== Page 0699 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="12">MITANT MITIGRANTES OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF THE CHINESE OF

===== Page 0700 =====
CHAPTER 7 – FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">TABLE 7.11(a) (CONTINUED)<td colspan="11">MINIMAL FLOOR FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THICKNESS OF ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">CELLING OF GROUND<td colspan="11">CELLING CONSTRUCTION<td colspan="11">ITEM NUMBER<td colspan="11">FLOOR OR ROOF CONSTRUCTION<td colspan="11">ITEM NUMBER<td colspan="11">10. 40 mm-deep steel roof deck on steel framing<td colspan="11">board, 4/80.5 kg per m² density<td colspan="11">composed of wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood-fibres with compressed or wood

===== Page 0701 =====
CHAPTER 7 – FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="5">TABLE 7.1.13 (CONTINUED)<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM?TIMES OF FLOOR OR ROOFCELLING CONSTRUCTIONTHICKNESS OF FLOOR OR ROOF SLAVINGMINIMAL THICKNESS OF CELLING (millimeter)12.40 mm deep steel roof deck, steel framing, insulation of rigid board consisting of expanded perlite and fibers impregnated with 1.95 kg per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12.5 m per m², selected to meet roof deck 12

===== Page 0702 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">MINIMAL PROTECTION FEATURES OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THE FLOOR AND RO

===== Page 0703 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">MINIMUM FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURESFLOOR OR ROOF CONSTRUCTIONITEM NUMBERCLEARING CONSTRUCTIONTHICKNESS OF FLOOR OR ROOF SLA (millimeter)CELLING (millimeter)MINIMUM THICKNESS OF CEILING (millimeter)MINIMUM THICKNESS OF CEILING (millimeter)MINIMUM THICKNESS OF CEILING (millimeter)MINIMUM THICKNESS OF CEILING (millimeter)MINIMUM THICKNESS OF CEILING (millimeter)MINIMUM THICKNESS OF CEILING (millimeter)13.13Relief or removable gypsum plaster on metal raft secured to joists with 40 mm by No. 1 lagre by 1:1 mesh backed studs.13.1412.5 mm Type X Gypsum wallboard nailed to joists with 5.0 cm by 0.5 cm or wallboard nails at 150 mm center.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.5 mm thickened roofing tiles.12.

===== Page 0704 =====
TABLE 21.13 (CONTINUED)

<table><td colspan="11">MINIMAL THICKNESS OF TILOOR CEILING (millimeter)TILOOR OR ROOF COSTURCTIONTIMBER NUMBERCEILING CONSTRUCTIONhourshourshourshourshourshourshourshours15. Vermiculite (Portland cement to proportioned 1:4 (Portland cement to proportioned 1:4)</table>

CHAPTER 7 - FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

===== Page 0705 =====
CHAPTER 7 – FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">TABLE 7.1.13 (CONTINUED)<td colspan="11">MINIMAL PROTEITION FOR FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEMS OF THICKNESS OF FLOOR AND ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB

===== Page 0706 =====
MINIMAL ROOM SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td rowspan="2">FLOOR OR ROOF CONSTRUCTION<td rowspan="2">ITEM NUMBER<td rowspan="2">THICKNESS OF FLOOR OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="4">MINIMAL THICKNESS OF CEILING (millimeter)1 hours2 hours3 hours4 hours20. Relief concrete projection 1.6 (Pond and cement, reliefs aggregate)poured to 3 cm depth above top of constructions of 3.5 mm-dep. galvanized steel and 2.4 meter for 0.6 mm (No. 24 galvanized steel)2.1 meter for 0.5 mm (No. 26 steel)steel, 75 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm, 100 mm,

===== Page 0707 =====
CHAPTER 7 – FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">TABLE 7.1.13 (CONTINUED)<td colspan="11">MINIMAL PROTECTION FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THICKNESS OF ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)

===== Page 0708 =====
MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM

<table><td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM<td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROTEIN F

===== Page 0709 =====
CHAPTER 7 – FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">MINIMUM PROTECTION FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THICKNESS OF ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="11">CEILING (millimeter)1234567891023. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1624. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1625. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1626. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1627. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1628. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1629. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1630. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1631. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1632. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1633. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1634. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1635. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1636. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1637. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1638. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1639. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1640. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1641. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1642. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1643. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1644. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1645. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1646. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1647. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1648. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1649. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1650. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1651. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1652. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1653. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1654. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1655. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1656. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1657. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1658. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1659. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1660. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1661. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1662. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)1663. Wood L-1-ost (minimum, lost depth 23.5 mm with a minimum flange depth of 3.5 mm and a minimum flange cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inches)16

===== Page 0710 =====
CHAPTER 7 – FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="5">MINIMUM FLOOR PROTECTION FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THICKNESS OF ROOF SLAB (millimeter)</table>

===== Page 0711 =====
MINIMAL PROTEIN FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEMS OF

<table><td rowspan="2">FLOOR OR ROOF CONSTRUCTIONS<td rowspan="2">ITEM NUMBER<td rowspan="2">CITING CONSTRUCTIONS<td colspan="3">THICKNESS OF FLOOR OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)<td colspan="3">MINIMAL THICKNESS OF CEILING (millimeter)hourshourshourshourshourshours26. Wood 1-0-0st (minimum 1-0-0 st depth thickness of 40 mm and a minimum 1-0-0 mm thick)26.1.1Two layers of 1.25 mm Type X epoxy with a wallboard applied with a long dimension perpendicular to the 1-0-0s and with a long dimension perpendicular to the 1-0-0s is fastened with 300 mm of Type S screws spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S screws are spaced 300 mm apart. Type S

===== Page 0712 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="5">MINIMAL PROPORTIONAL FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEM OF THICKNESS OF FLOOR OR ROOF SLAB (millimeter)</table>

===== Page 0713 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="5">MINIMUM FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURESFLOOR OR ROOF CONSTRUCTIONITEM NUMBERCLEARING CONSTRUCTIONTHICKNESS OF FLOOR OR ROOF SLA (in inches)MINIMUM FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES OF FLOOR OR ROOF28. Wood / joist (minimum 1-foot-depth 25.5 mm with a minimum 4-inch depth of 40 mm and a minimum 4-inch cross-sectional area of 1.485 square inch)28.1.1Base layer of 16 mm Type C epoxy-walboard attached directly to 1-inch or 3-inch Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S drywall screens spaced 300 mm. Type S dry

===== Page 0714 =====
MATERIAL PROTECTION FLOOR AND ROOF SYSTEMS

<table><td colspan="5">CETLING CONSTRUCTIONITEM NUMBERITEM TYPE NUMBERBASE layer 16 mm Type Type system board applied perpendicularly to floor of animal membrane with 30 mm Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer 16 mm Type X type bonding board attached to Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer Type S-12 screws spaced 300 mm o.c. Second layer

===== Page 0715 =====
CHAPTER 7—FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

<table><td colspan="11">MINIMAL PROTECTION FEATURES<td colspan="11">MINIMAL PROTECTION FEATURES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF THE ACCESSORIES OF

===== Page 0716 =====
Cement plaster with 7 kg of hydrated lime and 1.36 kg of approved additives or adjustments per bag of cement.

Gypsum and plaster ceiling and ceiling tiles for 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channeled with 40 mm cold-formed cavity and 1200 mm on center. Cross-firing channel

===== Page 0717 =====
TABLE 722.2.1.1

MINIMUM EQUIVALENT THICKNESS OF CAST-IN-PLACE OR PRECAST CONCRETE WALLS, LOAD-BEARING OR NONLOAD-BEARING

<table><td rowspan="2">CONCRETE TYPE<td colspan="6">MINIMUM SLAB THICKNESS (millimeter) FOR FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING OF1 hour1½ hours2 hours3 hours4 hoursSiliceous90110125160175Carbonate80100115145170Sand-lightweight708595115135Lightweight658090110130</table>

TABLE 722.2.1.2(1)

VALUES OF  \( R_{n}^{0.59} \)  FOR USE IN EQUATION 7-4

<table><td rowspan="2">TYPE OF MATERIAL<td colspan="12">THICKNESS OF MATERIAL (millimeter)3851647689102114127140152165178Siliceous aggregate concrete5.36.58.19.511.313.014.916.918.820.722.825.1Carbonate aggregate concrete5.57.18.910.412.014.016.218.120.321.924.727.2Sand-lightweight concrete6.58.210.512.815.518.120.723.326.0 \( ^{c} \)Note cNote cNote cLightweight concrete6.68.811.213.716.519.121.924.727.8 \( ^{c} \)Note cNote cNote cInsulating concrete \( ^{a} \)9.313.316.618.323.126.5 \( ^{c} \)Note cNote cNote cNote cNote cNote cAirspace \( ^{b} \)————————————</table>

a. Dry unit weight of 560 kg per m³ or less and consisting of cellular, perlite or vermiculite concrete.

b. The  \( R_{n}^{0.59} \)  value for one 12.5 mm to 90 mm airspace is 3.3. The  \( R_{n}^{0.59} \)  value for two 12.5 mm to 90 mm airspaces is 6.7.

c. The fire-resistance rating for this thickness exceeds 4 hours.

TABLE 722.2.1.2(2)

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS BASED ON  \( R^{0.59} \)

<table>R^{a}, MINUTESR^{0.59}6011.2012016.8518021.4124025.37</table>

a. Based on Equation 7-4.

TABLE 722.2.1.4(1)

MULTIPLYING FACTOR FOR FINISHES ON NONFIRE-EXPOSED SIDE OF WALL

<table><td rowspan="2">Type of finish applied to concrete or concrete masonry wall<td colspan="4">TYPE OF AGGREGATE USED IN CONCRETE OR CONCRETE MASONRYConcrete: siliceous or carbonate Concrète Masonry: siliceous or carbonate; solid clay brickConcrete: sand-lightweight Concrète Masonry: clay tile; hollow clay brick; concrete masonry units of expanded shale and &lt; 20% sandConcrete: lightweight Concrète Masonry: concrete masonry units of expanded clay, expanded slag, or pumice &lt; 20% sandConcrete Masonry: concrete masonry units of expanded slag, expanded clay, or pumicePortland cement-sand plaster1.000.75a0.75a0.50aGypsum-sand plaster1.251.001.001.00Gypsum-vermiculite or perlite plaster1.751.501.251.25Gypsum wallboard3.002.252.252.25</table>

a. For Portland cement-sand plaster 16 mm or less in thickness and applied directly to the concrete or concrete masonry on the nonfire-exposed side of the wall, the multiplying factor shall be 1.00.

===== Page 0718 =====
TABLE 722.2.1.4(2)

TIME ASSIGNED TO FINISH MATERIALS ON FIRE-EXPOSED SIDE OF WALL

<table>FINISH DESCRIPTIONTIME (minutes)Gypsum wallboard10 mm1012.5 mm1516 mm202 layers of 10 mm251 layer 10 mm, 1 layer 12.5 mm352 layers 12.5 mm40Type X gypsum wallboard12.5 mm202 layers 12.5 mm40Portland cement-sand plaster applied directly to concrete masonrySee Note aPortland cement-sand plaster on metal lath20 mm2022 mm2525 mm30Gypsum sand plaster on 10 mm gypsum lath12.5 mm3516 mm4020 mm50Gypsum sand plaster on metal lath20 mm5022 mm6025 mm80</table>

a. The actual thickness of Portland cement-sand plaster, provided it is 16 mm or less in thickness, shall be permitted to be included in determining the equivalent thickness of the masonry for use in Table 722.3.2.

TABLE 722.2.2.1

MINIMUM SLAB THICKNESS (millimeter)

<table><td rowspan="2">CONCRETE TYPE<td colspan="5">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)11½234Siliceous90110125160175Carbonate80100115145170Sand-lightweight708595115135Lightweight658090110130</table>

TABLE 722.2.3(1)

COVER THICKNESS FOR REINFORCED CONCRETE FLOOR OR ROOF SLABS (millimeter)

<table><td rowspan="3">CONCRETE AGGREGATE TYPE<td colspan="10">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)<td colspan="5">Restrained<td colspan="5">Unrestrained11½23411½234Siliceous20202020202020253240Carbonate20202020202020203232Sand-lightweight or lightweight20202020202020203232</table>

TABLE 722.2.3(2)

COVER THICKNESS FOR PRESTRESSED CONCRETE FLOOR OR ROOF SLABS (millimeter)

<table><td rowspan="3">CONCRETE AGGREGATE TYPE<td colspan="10">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)<td colspan="5">Restrained<td colspan="5">Unrestrained11½23411½234Siliceous20202020203040456070Carbonate20202020202535405560Sand-lightweight or lightweight20202020202535405060</table>

===== Page 0719 =====
TABLE 722.2.3(3)

MINIMUM COVER FOR MAIN REINFORCING BARS OF REINFORCED CONCRETE BEAMS \( ^{c} \)  (APPLICABLE TO ALL TYPES OF STRUCTURAL CONCRETE)

<table><td rowspan="2">RESTRAINED OR UNRESTRAINED \( ^{a} \)<td rowspan="2">BEAM WIDTH \( ^{b} \)  (millimeter)<td colspan="5">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)11 \( ^{1/2} \)234<td rowspan="3">Restrained12520202025 \( ^{a} \)32 \( ^{a} \)1752020202020\( \geq \) 2502020202020<td rowspan="3">Unrestrained125202532——1752020204575\( \geq \) 2502020202545</table>

a. Tabulated values for restrained assemblies apply to beams spaced more than 1200 mm on center. For restrained beams spaced 1200 mm or less on center, minimum cover of 20 mm is adequate for ratings of 4 hours or less.

b. For beam widths between the tabulated values, the minimum cover thickness can be determined by direct interpolation.

c. The cover for an individual reinforcing bar is the minimum thickness of concrete between the surface of the bar and the fire-exposed surface of the beam. For beams in which several bars are used, the cover for corner bars used in the calculation shall be reduced to one-half of the actual value. The cover for an individual bar must be not less than one-half of the value given in Table 722.2.3(3) nor less than 20 mm.

TABLE 722.2.3(4)

MINIMUM COVER FOR PRESTRESSED CONCRETE BEAMS (200 mm) OR GREATER IN WIDTH \( ^{b} \)

<table><td rowspan="2">RESTRAINED OR UNRESTRAINED \( ^{a} \)<td rowspan="2">CONCRETE AGGREGATE TYPE<td rowspan="2">BEAM WIDTH (mm)<td colspan="5">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)11 \( ^{1/2} \)234<td rowspan="4">RestrainedCarbonate or siliceous20040404045 \( ^{a} \)65 \( ^{a} \)Carbonate or siliceous\( \geq \) 3004040404050 \( ^{a} \)Sand lightweight2004040404050 \( ^{a} \)Sand lightweight\( \geq \) 3004040404040 \( ^{a} \)<td rowspan="4">UnrestrainedCarbonate or siliceous200404565125 \( ^{c} \)—Carbonate or siliceous\( \geq \) 300404050 \( ^{a} \)6575Sand lightweight20040405085—Sand lightweight\( \geq \) 3004040405065</table>

a. Tabulated values for restrained assemblies apply to beams spaced more than 1200 mm on center. For restrained beams spaced 1200 mm or less on center, minimum cover of 20 mm is adequate for 4-hour ratings or less.

b. For beam widths between 200 mm and 300 mm, minimum cover thickness can be determined by direct interpolation.

c. Not practical for 203 mm-wide beam but shown for purposes of interpolation.

===== Page 0720 =====
TABLE 722.2.3(5)

MINIMUM COVER FOR PRESTRESSED CONCRETE BEAMS OF ALL WIDTHS

<table><td rowspan="2">RESTRAINED OR UNRESTRAINEDa<td rowspan="2">CONCRETE AGGREGATE TYPE<td rowspan="2">BEAM AREAb A (square millimeter)<td colspan="5">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)11½234<td rowspan="4">RestrainedAll25,800 ≤ A ≤ 96,80040405065—Carbonate or96800 &lt; A ≤ 193,5504040404565siliceous193,550 &lt; A4040404050Sand lightweight96,800 &lt; A4040404050<td rowspan="4">UnrestrainedAll25,800 ≤ A ≤ 96,8005065———Carbonate or96800 &lt; A ≤ 193,550404565——siliceous193,550 &lt; A4040503c4cSand lightweight96,800 &lt; A4040503c4c</table>

a. Tabulated values for restrained assemblies apply to beams spaced more than 1200 mm on center. For restrained beams spaced 1200 mm or less on center, minimum cover of 20 mm is adequate for 4-hour ratings or less.

b. The cross-sectional area of a stem is permitted to include a portion of the area in the flange, provided the width of the flange used in the calculation does not exceed three times the average width of the stem.

c. U-shaped or hooped stirrups spaced not to exceed the depth of the member and having a minimum cover of 25 mm shall be provided.

TABLE 722.2.4

MINIMUM DIMENSION OF CONCRETE COLUMNS (millimeter)

<table><td rowspan="2">TYPES OF CONCRETE<td colspan="5">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)11½2a3a4bSiliceous200225250300350Carbonate200225250275300Sand-lightweight200215225265300</table>

a. The minimum dimension is permitted to be reduced to 200 mm for rectangular columns with two parallel sides not less than 900 mm in length.

b. The minimum dimension is permitted to be reduced to 250 mm for rectangular columns with two parallel sides not less than 900 mm in length.

TABLE 722.3.2

MINIMUM EQUIVALENT THICKNESS (millimeter) OF BEARING OR NONBEARING CONCRETE MASONRY WALLS \( ^{a,b,c,d} \)

<table><td rowspan="2">TYPE OF AGGREGATE<td colspan="15">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)1/23/411/41/21/422/42/22/433/43/23/44Pumice or expanded slag40505565707580859095100105110115120Expanded shale, clay or slate4555657585859095100105110115120125130Limestone, cinders or unexpanded slag506070808595100110115120125130140145150Calcareous or siliceous gravel5060708090100105115120125135140145150160</table>

a. Values between those shown in the table can be determined by direct interpolation.

===== Page 0721 =====
b. Where combustible members are framed into the wall, the thickness of solid material between the end of each member and the opposite face of the wall, or between members set in from opposite sides, shall be not less than 93 percent of the thickness shown in the table.

c. Requirements of ASTM C 55, ASTM C 73, ASTM C 90 or ASTM C 744 shall apply.

d. Minimum required equivalent thickness corresponding to the hourly fire-resistance rating for units with a combination of aggregate shall be determined by linear interpolation based on the percent by volume of each aggregate used in manufacture.

TABLE 722.3.4

MINIMUM COVER OF LONGITUDINAL REINFORCEMENT IN FIRE-RESISTANCE-RATED REINFORCED CONCRETE MASONRY LINTELS (millimeter)

<table><td rowspan="2">NOMINAL WIDTH OF LINTEL (millimeter)<td colspan="4">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)12341504050——20040404575250 or greater40404045</table>

TABLE 722.3.5

MINIMUM DIMENSION OF CONCRETE MASONRY COLUMNS (millimeter)

<table><td colspan="4">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)1234200250300350</table>

TABLE 722.4.1(1)

FIRE-RESISTANCE PERIODS OF CLAY MASONRY WALLS

<table><td rowspan="2">MATERIAL TYPE<td colspan="4">MINIMUM REQUIRED EQUIVALENT THICKNESS FOR FIRE RESISTANCE \( ^{a,b,c} \)  (millimeter)1 hour2 hours3 hours4 hoursSolid brick of clay or shale \( ^{d} \)7095125150Hollow brick or tile of clay or shale, unfilled6085110125Hollow brick or tile of clay or shale, grouted or filled with materials specified in Section 722.4.1.1.375110140170</table>

a. Equivalent thickness as determined from Section 722.4.1.1.

b. Calculated fire resistance between the hourly increments listed shall be determined by linear interpolation.

c. Where combustible members are framed in the wall, the thickness of solid material between the end of each member and the opposite face of the wall, or between members set in from opposite sides, shall be not less than 93 percent of the thickness shown.

d. For units in which the net cross-sectional area of cored brick in any plane parallel to the surface containing the cores is not less than 75 percent of the gross cross-sectional area measured in the same plane.

===== Page 0722 =====
TABLE 722.4.1(2)

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS FOR BEARING STEEL FRAME BRICK VENEER WALLS OR PARTITIONS

<table>WALL OR PARTITION ASSEMBLYPLASTER SIDE EXPOSED (hours)BRICK FACED SIDE EXPOSED (hours)Outside facing of steel studs:12.5 mm wood fiberboard sheathing next to studs, 20 mm airspace formed with 20 mm × 40 mm wood strips placed over the fiberboard and secured to the studs; metal or wire lath nailed to such strips, 95 mm brick veneer held in place by filling 20 mm airspace between the brick and lath with mortar. Inside facing of studs: 20 mm unsanded gypsum plaster on metal or wire lath attached to 8 mm wood strips secured to edges of the studs1.54Outside facing of steel studs:25 mm insulation board sheathing attached to studs, 25 mm airspace, and 95 mm brick veneer attached to steel frame with metal ties every 5th course. Inside facing of studs: 22 mm sanded gypsum plaster (1:2 mix) applied on metal or wire lath attached directly to the studsSame as above except use 22 mm vermiculite—gypsum plaster or 25 mm sanded gypsum plaster (1:2 mix) applied to metal or wire24Outside facing of steel studs:12.5 mm gypsum sheathing board, attached to studs, and 95 mm brick veneer attached to steel frame with metal ties every 5th course. Inside facing of studs: 12.5 mm sanded gypsum plaster (1:2 mix) applied to 12.5 mm perforated gypsum lath securely attached to studs and having strips of metal lath 75 mm wide applied to all horizontal joints of gypsum lath24</table>

TABLE 722.4.1(3)

VALUES OF  \( R_{N}^{0.59} \)

<table>\( R_{n}^{0.59} \)R (hours)11.021.5031.9142.27</table>

TABLE 722.4.1(4)

COEFFICIENTS FOR PLASTER,  \( PL^{a} \)

<table>THICKNESS OF PLASTER (millimeter)ONE SIDETWO SIDES130.30.6160.370.75200.450.90</table>

a. Values listed in the table are for 1:3 sanded gypsum plaster.

TABLE 722.4.1(5)

REINFORCED MASONRY LINTELS

<table><td rowspan="2">NOMINAL LINTEL WIDTH (millimeter)<td colspan="4">MINIMUM LONGITUDINAL REINFORCEMENT COVER FOR FIRE RESISTANCE (millimeter)1 hour2 hours3 hours4 hours1504050NPNP20040404575250 or more40404045</table>

NP = Not permitted.

TABLE 722.4.1(6)

REINFORCED CLAY MASONRY COLUMNS

<table><td rowspan="2">COLUMN SIZE<td colspan="4">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)1234Minimum column dimension (millimeter)200250300350</table>

===== Page 0723 =====
TABLE 722.5.1(1)

W/D RATIOS FOR STEEL COLUMNS

<table><td colspan="4">STRUCTURAL SHAPE<td rowspan="2">Contour Profile kg/m/mm<td rowspan="2">Box Profile kg/m/mm<td colspan="4">STRUCTURAL SHAPE<td rowspan="2">Contour Profile kg/m/mm<td rowspan="2">Box Profile kg/m/mm<td colspan="2">in.x lb/ft<td colspan="2">mm x kg/m<td colspan="4">in.x lb/ftW14X233W360X3470.1500.215W10X112W250X211X3140.1370.198X100X193X2870.1260.182X88X176X2620.1160.168X77X159X2370.1050.153X68X145X2160.0970.141X60X132X1960.0920.133X54X120X1790.0840.122X49X109X1620.0760.111X45X99X1470.0700.101X39X90X1340.0640.093X33X82X1220.0730.099X74X1100.0660.090W8X67X68X1010.0610.083X58X61X910.0550.076X48X53X790.0540.071X40X48X710.0490.065X35X43X640.0440.058X31X28X24W12X190W310X2830.1480.207X24170X2530.1330.189X21152X2260.1200.171X18136X2020.1100.155120X1790.0970.139W6X25W150106X1580.0870.124X2096X1430.0790.114X1687X1290.0720.104X1579X1180.0650.095X1272X1070.0600.087X965X970.0550.08058X860.0550.077W5X19W12553X790.0500.071X1650X740.0540.07345X670.0490.066W4X13W10040X600.0430.059</table>

TABLE 722.5.1(2)

PROPERTIES OF CONCRETE

<table>PROPERTYNORMAL-WEIGHT CONCRETESTRUCTURAL LIGHTWEIGHT CONCRETEThermal conductivity ( \( k_{c} \) )1.64 Watt/m  \( \cdot \)  K0.61 Watt/m  \( \cdot \)  KSpecific heat ( \( C_{c} \) )0.84 kJ/kg  \( \cdot \)  K0.84 kJ/kg  \( \cdot \)  KDensity ( \( P_{c} \) )2400 kg per m \( ^{3} \)1750 kg per m \( ^{3} \)Equilibrium (free) moisture content (m) by volume4%5%</table>

===== Page 0724 =====
TABLE 722.5.1(3)

THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY OF CONCRETE OR CLAY MASONRY UNITS

<table>DENSITY (dm) OF UNITS (kg per m³)THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY (K) OF UNITS Watt/m·°K<td colspan="2">Concrete Masonry Units12800.35813600.39514400.43615200.48116000.53316800.58817600.65118400.72019200.79420000.87920800.97121601.07322401.18623201.31224001.449<td colspan="2">Clay Masonry Units19202.1620803.89</table>

===== Page 0725 =====
TABLE 722.5.1(4)

WEIGHT-TO-HEATED-PERIMETER RATIOS (W/D) FOR TYPICAL WIDE FLANGE BEAM AND GIRDER SHAPES

<table><td rowspan="2"><td colspan="3">Structural Shape<td rowspan="2">Contour Profile kg/m/mm<td rowspan="2">Box Profile kg/m/mm<td colspan="3">Structural Shape<td rowspan="2">Contour Profile kg/m/mm<td rowspan="2">Box Profile kg/m/mmin x lb/ftmm x kg/mW36X300W920X4460.1480.196W16X40X280X4170.1390.184X36X260X3870.1290.172X31X245X3650.1230.163X26X230X3420.1150.154X210X3130.1160.145W14X132X194X2890.1070.135X120X182X2710.1010.127X109X170X2530.0940.119X99X160X2380.0890.112X90X150X2230.0840.106X82X135X2010.0760.096X74X68X61X53X48X43X38X34X30X26X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X22X

===== Page 0726 =====
TABLE 722.5.1(4) – CONTINUED

CONTINUED WEIGHT-TO-HEATED-PERIMETER RATIOS (W/D) FOR TYPICAL WIDE FLANGE BEAM AND GIRDER SHAPES

<table>X94X1400.0760.096X77X1150.0910.145X84X1250.0680.087X68X1010.0810.130X76X1130.0620.079X60X890.0720.116X68X1010.0560.071X54X800.0650.106X62X920.0550.067X49X730.0600.097X55X820.0490.060X45X670.0630.094X39X580.0550.083W21X147W530X2190.1100.153X33X490.0450.071X132X1960.0990.139X30X450.0480.066X122X1820.0930.129X26X390.0420.058X111X1650.0840.119X22X330.0360.050X101X1500.0770.109X19X280.0360.046X93X1380.0830.106X17X250.0320.041X83X1240.0740.096X15X220.0290.037X73X1090.0650.085X12X180.0230.030X68X1010.0610.080X62X920.0560.073W8X67W200X1000.0970.150X57X850.0560.069X58X860.0850.133X50X740.0490.061X48X710.0710.113X44X650.0440.054X40X600.0610.096X35X520.0540.085W18X119W460X1770.1010.143X31X460.0470.076X106X1580.0910.129X28X420.0480.073X97X1440.0840.119X24X360.0420.063X86X1280.0750.106X21X310.0400.057X76X1130.0670.094X18X270.0340.050X71X1060.0720.094X15X220.0330.044X65X970.0670.087X13X190.0280.038X60X890.0610.080X10X150.0220.030X55X820.0570.074X50X740.0520.068W6X25W150X370.0500.078X46X680.0520.064X20X300.0400.064X40X600.0450.057X16X240.0400.057X35X520.0400.050X15X220.0310.049X9X130.0230.034W16X100W410X1490.0940.133X9W15X180.0460.073X89X1320.0840.120X77X1150.0740.105W5X19W125X280.0460.073X67X1000.0640.092X16X240.0390.063X57X850.0640.084X50X740.0570.074W4X13W100X190.0400.062X45X670.0510.068</table>

===== Page 0727 =====
TABLE 722.5.1(5)

FIRE RESISTANCE OF CONCRETE MASONRY PROTECTED STEEL COLUMNS

<table><td rowspan="2">COLUMN SIZE<td rowspan="2">Concrete Masonry Density<td colspan="5">Minimum Required Equivalent Thickness For Fire-resistance Rating of Concrete Masonry Protection Assembly Te (mm)<td rowspan="2">Concrete Masonry Density<td rowspan="2">Minimum Required Equivalent Thickness For Fire-resistance Rating of Concrete Masonry Protection Assembly Te (mm)1 hour2 hours3 hours4 hours<td rowspan="4">in.x lb/ft<td rowspan="4">mm x kg/m<td rowspan="4">kg/m³1234<td rowspan="4">in x lb/ft<td rowspan="4">mm x kg/m³hourhourshourshours128019416077128023476886<td rowspan="3">W14×82<td rowspan="3">W360 x 1221600245071<td rowspan="3">W10×68W250 x 101160017602450711760221920265375192026<td rowspan="4">W14×68<td rowspan="4">W360 x 101128021436280<td rowspan="4">W10×541280160025507016002217602752741760281920295577192030<td rowspan="4">W14×53<td rowspan="4">W360 x 79128023466683<td rowspan="4">W10×451280160027527316002717602955771760291920315880192031<td rowspan="4">W14×43<td rowspan="4">W360 x 64128026496987<td rowspan="4">W10×331280160030557616003117603258801760331920346083192035<td rowspan="4">W12×72<td rowspan="4">W310 x 107128021426178<td rowspan="4">W8×401280160023486916002817602551721760301920275376192032<td rowspan="4">W12×58<td rowspan="4">W310 x 86128022456482<td rowspan="4">W8×311280160026517216003117602854751760331920305779192035<td rowspan="4">W12×50<td rowspan="4">W310 x 74128023466683<td rowspan="4">W8×241280160027527316003317602955771760351920315880192036<td rowspan="4">W12×40<td rowspan="4">W310 x 60128026496987<td rowspan="4">W8×181280160030557616003117603258801760361920346183192038</table>

===== Page 0728 =====
TABLE 722.5.1(5) – CONTINUED

FIRE RESISTANCE OF CONCRETE MASONRY PROTECTED STEEL COLUMNS

<table><td rowspan="4">4×4×2wallthickness<td rowspan="4">100×100×13wallthickness1280244869874 double100 double128020446583160027547696extra strongextra strong1600245172921760295780990.674 wall17 wall1760265376961920315983103thicknessthickness1920285679100<td rowspan="4">4×4×3/8wallthickness<td rowspan="4">100×100×10wallthickness1280275272914 extra100 extra128028547493160030577999strongstrong 9160032598110017603260821020.337 wallwall17603461841041920346286106thicknessthickness1920366487107<td rowspan="4">4×4×1/4wallthickness<td rowspan="4">100×100×6wallthickness1280315676954 standard100 standard12803257789616003461831020.237 wall6 wall16003662841031760366486106thicknessthickness176037658710719203866891091920396790110<td rowspan="4">6×6×2/5wallthickness<td rowspan="4">150×150×13wallthickness1280214465835 double125 double128018416179160025517291extra strongextra strong1600224769881760275376950.750 wall19 wall176023507292192028567999thicknessthickness192025517696<td rowspan="4">6×6×3/8wallthickness<td rowspan="4">150×150×10wallthickness1280244969875 extra125 extra128026517290160028547695strongstrong 91600305778981760305780990.375 wallwall17603259821021920326083103thicknessthickness1920346285105<td rowspan="4">6×6×1/4wallthickness<td rowspan="4">150×150×6wallthickness1280295474925 standard125 standard12803056769416003359811000.258 wall7 wall16003461831021760356284104thicknessthickness176036638610519203664871071920376689109<td rowspan="4">8×8×2/2wallthickness<td rowspan="4">200×200×13wallthickness1280204262806 double150 double128015375774160023497089extra strongextra strong1600194365841760255173930.864 wall22 wall176020466888192027547797thicknessthickness192022497292<td rowspan="4">8×8×3/8wallthickness<td rowspan="4">200×200×10wallthickness1280234767856 extra150 extra128024486987160027537493strongstrong 111600285476951760295678970.432 wallwall1760305779991920315881101thicknessthickness1920315982103<td rowspan="4">8×8×1/4wallthickness<td rowspan="4">200×200×13wallthickness1280285273916 standard150 standard1280295474921600325880980.280 wall7 wall16003359811001760346083102thicknessthickness176035628410419203563861061920366487107</table>

Note: Tabulated values assume 25 mm air gap between masonry and steel section.

===== Page 0729 =====
TABLE 22.5.1(6)

FIRE RESISTANCE OF CLAY MASONRY PROTECTED STEEL COLUMNS

<table><td colspan="2">COLUMN SIZEConcrete Masonry Density<td colspan="4">Minimum Required Equivalent Thickness For Fire-resistance Rating of Concrete Masonry Protection Assembly Te (mm)<td colspan="4">Minimum Required Equivalent Thickness For Fire-resistance Rating of Concrete Masonry Protection Assembly Te (mm)</table>

===== Page 0730 =====
TABLE 722.5.1(6) – CONTINUED

FIRE RESISTANCE OF CLAY MASONRY PROTECTED STEEL COLUMNS

<table>6×6×1/4150×150×192042741001235 standard125 standard19204375102124wall6 wall208046811091340.258 wall7 wall20804882110135thicknessthicknessthicknessthickness8×8×½200×200×19203264891126 double150 double1920265884107wall13 wall2080377199123extra strongextra strong2080306693119thicknessthickness0.864 wall22 wall20803066931198×8×3/8200×200×19203668941176 extra150 extra1920376995118wall10 wall20804175103128strong 0.432strong 1120804176104129thicknessthicknessthicknessthickness8×8×1/4200×200×19204173991216 standard150 standard19204274100123wall6 wall208045801081320.280 wall7 wall20804681109134thicknessthicknessthicknessthickness</table>

TABLE 722.5.1(7)

MINIMUM COVER (mm) FOR STEEL COLUMNS ENCASED IN NORMAL-WEIGHT CONCRETE \( ^{a} \)  [FIGURE 722.5.1(6)(c)]

<table><td rowspan="2">STRUCTURAL SHAPE<td colspan="6">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)11 1/2234W14 × 233×176254050×132×90255065×6140×4840×436575W12 × 152252550×96×65254040×50×40W10 × 882550×4940×45×392565×3350W8 × 672540×58×48×312540×21×18W6 × 254050×20×16×1550×9</table>

a. The tabulated thicknesses are based upon the assumed properties of normal-weight concrete given in Table 722.5.1(2).

===== Page 0731 =====
TABLE 722.5.1(8)

MINIMUM COVER (mm) FOR STEEL COLUMNS ENCASED IN STRUCTURAL LIGHTWEIGHT CONCRETE \( ^{a} \)  [FIGURE 722.5.1(6)]

<table><td rowspan="2">STRUCTURAL SHAPE<td colspan="6">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (HOURS)11/2234W14 × 2332540× 193× 742525254050× 61× 43405065W12 × 65254050× 5325255065× 4040W10 × 112254050× 8825255065× 60× 3340W8 × 355065× 28252540× 2465× 1840</table>

a. The tabulated thicknesses are based upon the assumed properties of structural lightweight concrete given in Table 722.5.1(2).

===== Page 0732 =====
TABLE 722.5.1(9)

MINIMUM COVER (mm) FOR STEEL COLUMNS IN NORMAL-WEIGHT PRECAST COVERS \( ^{a} \)  [FIGURE 72.5.1(6)(a)]

<table><td rowspan="2">STRUCTURAL SHAPE<td colspan="6">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)11/2234W14 × 233<td rowspan="6">40<td rowspan="3">4040<td rowspan="2">65<td rowspan="2">75× 2115090× 176<td rowspan="4">50<td rowspan="4">75<td rowspan="4">90× 145<td rowspan="3">50<td rowspan="3">100× 109114× 99<td rowspan="3">50<td rowspan="3">65<td rowspan="3">90× 61<td rowspan="2">40<td rowspan="2">100× 43114W12 × 190<td rowspan="6">40<td rowspan="3">4040<td rowspan="2">65<td rowspan="2">90× 15250100× 120<td rowspan="3">40<td rowspan="3">50<td rowspan="3">75<td rowspan="3">100× 96114× 87<td rowspan="3">50<td rowspan="3">65<td rowspan="3">90× 58<td rowspan="2">40<td rowspan="2">114× 40100W10 × 112<td rowspan="6">40<td rowspan="3">4040<td rowspan="2">50<td rowspan="2">75<td rowspan="2">90× 8850100× 77<td rowspan="3">50<td rowspan="3">65<td rowspan="3">90<td rowspan="3">114× 54100× 33114W8 × 67<td rowspan="6">40<td rowspan="3">4040<td rowspan="2">50<td rowspan="2">75<td rowspan="2">100× 585090× 48<td rowspan="3">50<td rowspan="3">65<td rowspan="3">90<td rowspan="3">114× 28100× 21114× 18<td rowspan="4">50<td rowspan="4">50<td rowspan="4">65<td rowspan="4">75<td rowspan="4">100W6 × 25<td rowspan="3">40<td rowspan="3">40<td rowspan="3">114× 20114× 16100× 12<td rowspan="2">50<td rowspan="2">50<td rowspan="2">65<td rowspan="2">75<td rowspan="2">100× 9125</table>

a. The tabulated thicknesses are based upon the assumed properties of normal-weight concrete given in Table 722.5.1(2).

===== Page 0733 =====
TABLE 72.5.1(10)

MINIMUM COVER (mm) FOR STEEL COLUMNS IN STRUCTURAL LIGHTWEIGHT PRECAST COVERS \( ^{a} \)  [FIGURE 722.5.1(6) (a)]

<table><td rowspan="2">STRUCTURAL SHAPE<td colspan="5">FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)11/2234W14 × 2335065× 176× 14540× 1324075× 10965× 99× 685090× 4375W12 × 1905065× 152× 1364075× 106× 9665× 8790× 6550× 4075W10 × 11250× 1004075× 8865× 77× 605090× 39× 335075W8 × 674065× 4840× 355090× 28× 1865100W6 × 255090× 15× 9</table>

a. The tabulated thicknesses are based upon the assumed properties of structural lightweight concrete given in Table 722.5.1(2).

===== Page 0734 =====
TABLE 72.6.2(1)

TIME ASSIGNED TO WALLBOARD MEMBRANES \( ^{a,b,c,d} \)

<table>DESCRIPTION OF FINISHTIME \( ^{e} \)  (minutes)10 mm wood structural panel bonded with exterior glue515 mm wood structural panel bonded with exterior glue1015 mm wood structural panel bonded with exterior glue1510 mm gypsum wallboard1012.5 mm gypsum wallboard1512.5 mm gypsum wallboard3012.5 mm Type X gypsum wallboard2516 mm Type X gypsum wallboard40Double 10 mm gypsum wallboard2512.5 mm + 10 mm gypsum wallboard35Double 10 mm gypsum wallboard40</table>

a. These values apply only where membranes are installed on framing members that are spaced 400 mm o.c. or less.

b. Gypsum wallboard installed over framing or furnishing shall be installed so that all edges are supported, except 16 mm Type X gypsum wallboard shall be permitted to be installed horizontally with the horizontal joints staggered 600 mm each side and unsupported but finished.

c. On wood frame floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies, gypsum board shall be installed with the long dimension perpendicular to framing members and shall have all joints finished.

d. The membrane on the unexposed side shall not be included in determining the fire resistance of the assembly. Where dissimilar membranes are used on a wall assembly, the calculation shall be made from the least fire-resistant (weaker) side.

e. The time assigned is not a finished rating.

TABLE 72.6.2(2)

TIME ASSIGNED FOR CONTRIBUTION OF WOOD FRAME  \( ^{a,b} \)

<table>DESCRIPTIONTIME ASSIGNED TO FRAME (minutes)Wood studs 400 mm o.c.20Wood floor and roof joists 400 mm o.c.10</table>

a. This table does not apply to studs or joists spaced more than 400 mm o.c.

b. All studs shall be nominal  \( 2 \times 4 \)  and all joists shall have a nominal thickness of not less than 50 mm.

TABLE 72.6.2(3)

MEMBRANE \( ^{a} \)  ON EXTERIOR FACE OF WOOD STUD WALLS

<table>SHEATHINGPAPEREXTERIOR FINISH16 mm T &amp; G lumber8 mm exterior glue wood structural panel12.5 mm gypsum wallboard16 mm gypsum wallboard12.5 mm fiberboardSheathing paperLumber sidingWood shingles and shakes6 mm fiber-cement lap, panel or shingle siding6 mm wood structural panels-exterior type6 mm hardboardMetal sidingStucco on metal lathMasonry veneerVinyl sidingNone—10 mm exterior-grade wood structural panels</table>

a. Any combination of sheathing, paper and exterior finish is permitted.

===== Page 0735 =====
TABLE 72.6.2(4)

FLOORING OR ROOFING OVER WOOD FRAMING \( ^{a} \)

<table>ASSEMBLYSTRUCTURAL MEMBERSSUBFLOOR OR ROOF DECKFINISHED FLOORING OR ROOFINGFloorWood12.5 mm wood structural panels or 17 mm T &amp; G softwoodHardwood or softwood flooring on building paper resilient flooring, parquet floor felted-synthetic fiber floor coverings, carpeting, or ceramic tile on 6 mm-thick fiber-cement underlayment or 10 mm-thick panel-type underlay Ceramic tile on 32 mm mortar bedRoofWood12.5 mm wood structural panels or 17 mm T &amp; G softwoodFinished roofing material with or without insulation</table>

a. This table applies only to wood joist construction. It is not applicable to wood truss construction.

TABLE 72.6.2(5)

TIME ASSIGNED FOR ADDITIONAL PROTECTION

<table>DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL PROTECTIONFIRE RESISTANCE (minutes)Add to the fire-resistance rating of wood stud walls if the spaces between the studs are completely filled with glass fiber mineral wool bats weighing not less than 32 kg per m \( ^{3} \)  (0.029 kPa of wall surface) or rockwool or slag material wool bats weighing not less than 52 kg per m \( ^{3} \)  (0.048 kPa of wall surface), or cellulose insulation having a nominal density not less than 40 kg per m \( ^{3} \) .15</table>

TABLE 72.7.1(1)

PROTECTION REQUIRED FROM NONCOMBUSTIBLE COVERING MATERIAL

<table>Required Fire-Resistance Rating of Building Element Per Table 601 and Table 705.5 (Hours)Minimum Protection Required from Noncombustible Protection (minutes)1402803 or more120</table>

TABLE 72.7.1(2)

PROTECTION PROVIDED BY NONCOMBUSTIBLE COVERING MATERIAL

<table>Noncombustible ProtectionProtection Contribution (minutes)12.5 mm Type X gypsum board2516 mm Type X gypsum board40</table>

===== Page 0736 =====
FIGURE 703.2.1
STANDARD TIME-TEMPERATURE CURVE

FIGURE 704.2
COLUMN PROTECTION

===== Page 0737 =====
FIGURE 704.3
INDIVIDUAL FIRE PROTECTION METHOD

===== Page 0738 =====
FIGURE 705.2
PROJECTIONS FROM EXTERIOR WALLS

===== Page 0739 =====
 \( ^{*} \) Generally, would require a fire wall or exterior walls with no openings.

FIGURE 705.3
R-2 WITH S-2 PARKING GARAGE

===== Page 0740 =====
FIGURE 705.5(1)
DETERMINING FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE

FIGURE 705.5(2)
DETERMINING FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE FOR MULTISTORY BUILDINGS

===== Page 0741 =====
FIGURE 705.6
TYPE IIB AND VB EXTERIOR FIRE-RESISTANCE-RATED WALL CONTINUITY AND STRUCTURAL STABILITY

===== Page 0742 =====
FIGURE 705.7
EQUIVALENT OPENING FACTOR

FIGURE 705.7, EXAMPLE 705.7
ELEVATION OF EXTERIOR WALL

===== Page 0743 =====
FIGURE 705.8.1(1)
EXAMPLE OF BUILDING WITH FLOOR OFFSETS

FIGURE 705.8.1(2)
EXAMPLE OF BUILDING WITH FLOOR OFFSETS

===== Page 0744 =====
FIGURE 705.8.1(3)

EXAMPLES OF PERMITTED UNLIMITED OPENING AREA IN THE FIRST STORY

===== Page 0745 =====
FIGURE 705.8.5(1)
EXTERIOR WALL VERTICAL FLAME BARRIER

FIGURE 705.8.5(2)
EXTERIOR WALL HORIZONTAL FLAME BARRIER

===== Page 0746 =====
FIGURE 705.8.6
VERTICAL FIRE EXPOSURE OF ADJACENT BUILDING

===== Page 0747 =====
FIGURE 705.11.1(1)
PARAPET WALL EXTENSION WITH SLOPING 100% ROOF AND NONSPRINKLERED BUILDING

===== Page 0748 =====
FIGURE 705.11.1(2)
PARAPET WALL EXTENSION WITH SLOPING ROOF SPRINKLERED BUILDING

===== Page 0749 =====
FIGURE 706.2(1)

DETAILS OF MASONRY FIRE WALL FOR STABILITY (COMPLIMENTS OF NCMA)

===== Page 0750 =====
FIGURE 706.2(2)
DETAILS OF GYPSUM BOARD AREA SEPARATION WALLS (FIREWALL) (COMPLIMENTS OF GYPSUM ASSOCIATION)

===== Page 0751 =====
<table>Average fuel load kg/m2Equivalent fire endurance (hours)24.41/236.63/448.8173.21 1/297.62146.53195.34 1/2244.16292.97 1/2</table>

FIGURE 706.4(1)

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN FUEL LOAD AND FIRE ENDURANCE

<table>OccupancyCombustibles in occupancy Kg/m²Fire severity (hours)Assembly25 to 501/2 to 1Business25 to 501/2 to 1Educational25 to 501/2 to 1Factory—IndustrialLow hazard0 to 500 to 1Moderate hazard50 to 1201 to 3HazardousVariableVariableInstitutional25 to 501/2 to 1Mercantile50 to 1001 to 2Residential25 to 501/2 to 1StorageLow hazard0 to 500 to 1Moderate hazard50 to 1451 to 1</table>

FIGURE 706.4(2)

OCCUPANCIES—FUEL LOAD-FIRE SEVERITY

===== Page 0752 =====
FIGURE 706.5.1(1)
EXAMPLE OF METHOD 1

===== Page 0753 =====
FIGURE 706.5.1(2)
EXAMPLE OF METHOD 2

===== Page 0754 =====
FIGURE 706.5.1(3)
EXAMPLE OF METHOD 2

===== Page 0755 =====
FIGURE 706.6

GENERIC FIRE WALL EXAMPLE (SOURCE: NATIONAL GYPSUM COMPANY)

===== Page 0756 =====
FIGURE 706.6.1(3)
FIRE WALLS—EXTENSION EXCEPTION

===== Page 0757 =====
FIGURE 706.6.2
FIRE WALL EXTENSION AT SLOPING ROOF > 2:12

FIGURE 707.5
CONTINUITY OF FIRE BARRIERS

===== Page 0758 =====
FIGURE 708.4(1)
CONTINUITY OF FIRE PARTITIONS

FIGURE 708.4(2)(A)
FIRE PARTITION CONTINUITY

===== Page 0759 =====
FIGURE 708.4(2)(B)
FIRE PARTITION CONTINUITY

FIGURE 708.4(2)(C)
FIRE PARTITION CONTINUITY

===== Page 0760 =====
FIGURE 708.4.2(1)

DRAFTSTOPPING IN LINE WITH TENANT AND DWELLING UNIT SEPARATION WALL

FIGURE 708.4.2(2)

DRAFTSTOPPING AT TENANT AND DWELLING UNIT SEPARATION

===== Page 0761 =====
ASTRAGAL
FIGURE 709.5
ACCEPTABLE MEETING EDGES OF DOUBLE MEANS OF EGRESS DOORS

CEILING MEMBRANE
LAY-IN PANELS

NOTE: HOLD-DOWN CLIPS OR WIRES REQUIRED IF PANELS WEIGH LESS THAN 4.88kg/m²

FIGURE 711.2.5
CEILING PANELS USED IN FIRE-RESISTANCE-RATED ASSEMBLIES

FIGURE 711.2.6(1)
UNUSABLE SPACE ABOVE A FIRE-RESISTANCE-RATED ASSEMBLY

===== Page 0762 =====
FIGURE 711.2.6(2)
UNUSABLE SPACE BELOW A FIRE-RESISTANCE-RATED ASSEMBLY

===== Page 0763 =====
FLOOR OPENING CANNOT EXCEED TWICE THE HORIZONTAL PROJECTED AREA OF THE ESCALATOR

THEREFORE  \( L_{0} \times W_{0} \leq 2 \times L_{BS} \times W_{BS} \)

FIGURE 712.1.3.1
SHAFT ENCLOSURE—DRAFT CURTAIN EXCEPTION

===== Page 0764 =====
FIGURE 712.1.3.2
SHAFT ENCLOSURE—SHUTTERS EXCEPTION

FIGURE 712.1.9
TWO-STORY SHAFT ENCLOSURE EXCEPTION

===== Page 0765 =====
FIGURE 713.4
VERTICAL SHAFTS—FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING

FIGURE 713.7
PROTECTED OPENING IN SHAFT ENCLOSURE

===== Page 0766 =====
NOTE: 2-HOUR SHAFT IS TO BE SUPPORTED BY NO LESS THAN A 2-HOUR ASSEMBLY (SECTION 707.5)

FIGURE 713.11(1)
VERTICAL SHAFTS—BOTTOM ENCLOSURES METHOD 1

FIGURE 713.11(2)
VERTICAL SHAFTS—BOTTOM ENCLOSURE ROOM METHOD 2

===== Page 0767 =====
FIGURE 713.11(3)

VERTICAL SHAFTS—BOTTOM ENCLOSURE ROOM METHOD 2—EXCEPTION 1

FIGURE 713.11(4)

VERTICAL SHAFTS—BOTTOM ENCLOSURE WITH SPRINKLERS—METHOD 2—EXCEPTION 1

===== Page 0768 =====
FIGURE 713.11(5)
VERTICAL SHAFTS—BOTTOM ENCLOSURE EXCEPTION 3

FIGURE 713.13.3
REFUSE CHUTE (FIRE BARRIER OPTION)

===== Page 0769 =====
FIGURE 714.4.1(1)
VERTICAL SHAFTS—COMBUSTIBLE PENETRATIONS

FIGURE 714.4.1(2)
COMBUSTIBLE PIPE PENETRATION OF FIRE-RESISTANCE-RATED WALL

===== Page 0770 =====
FIGURE 714.4.1(3)
EXAMPLES OF ANNUAL SPACE PROTECTION

===== Page 0771 =====
AGGREGATE AREA OF OUTLET BOXES MUST NOT EXCEED 0.065 m² PER 10 m² OF WALL AREA OR SHAFT ENCLOSURE WALL AREA.

FIGURE 714.4.2(1)
OUTLET BOXES IN RATED ASSEMBLIES

FIGURE 714.4.2(2)
EXCEPTION TO ANNUAL SPACE PROTECTION

===== Page 0772 =====
FIGURE 714.5.1(1)
NONCOMBUSTIBLE PENETRATION OF A HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY

===== Page 0773 =====
FIGURE 714.5.1(2)
EXAMPLES OF ANNULAR SPACE PROTECTION WITH SLEEVES

===== Page 0774 =====
FIGURE 714.5.1.2

EXAMPLE OF CABLING THROUGH-PENETRATION FIRESTOP SYSTEM

===== Page 0775 =====
NOTE: 64500 mm² OF OPENING PERMITTED IN EACH 10 m² OF CEILING AREA

FIGURE 714.5.2(1)
PROTECTION OF PENETRATIONS THROUGH CEILING MEMBRANE OF A HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY

FIGURE 714.5.2(2)
NONCOMBUSTIBLE PIPE PENETRATIONS THROUGH CEILING MEMBRANE OF A HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY

===== Page 0776 =====
NOTE: NONCOMBUSTIBLE VENTS, CHIMNEYS, CONDUITS, PIPES AND TUBES CAN CONNECT UP TO FIVE STORES WHEN ANNULAR SPACE IS FILLED WITH AN APPROVED NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL

FIGURE 714.6.1

NONCOMBUSTIBLE PIPE PENETRATIONS OF NONFIRE-RESISTANCE-RATED ASSEMBLIES

===== Page 0777 =====


===== Page 0778 =====
FIGURE 715.4
EXTERIOR CURTAIN WALL/FLOOR INTERSECTION

===== Page 0779 =====
FIGURE 716.1.2.2(1)

FIRE-RATED GLAZING LOCATIONS [FOR USE WITH Table 716.1(1)]

<table>TYPE OF ASSEMBLYREQUIRED WALL ASSEMBLY RATING (HRS)DOOR VIEW PANEL A 64500mm² OR LESSDOOR VIEW PANEL A 64500mm²SIDELITE OR TRANSM PANELS B &amp; CWINDOW ASSEMBLY D<td rowspan="4">Fire wall and fire barrier wall4-hrNot PermittedNot PermittedW-240°W-240°3-hrNot PermittedNot PermittedW-180°W-180°2-hr[D-H-90][D-H-W-90]W-120°W-120°1½-hr[D-H-90][D-H-W-90]W-90°W-90°Shaft, exit enclosures and exit passageway walls2-hr[D-H-90][D-H-W-90] or [D-H-T-W-90]W-120°W-120°Fire barriers for enclosures of shafts, exit access stairways, exit access ramps, interior exit stairways and exit passageway walls1-hr[D-H-60][D-H-T-60] or [D-H-T-W-60]W-60°W-60°Other fire barriers1-hr[D-H-NT-45][D-H-NT-45][D-H-NT-45]W-60°Fire barriers - incidental use areas, mixed occupancy separations1-hr[D-H-NT-45][D-H-NT-45][D-H-NT-45][OH-45] or W-60°Fire partitions: Corridor walls1-hr[D-20][D-20][D-H-OH-45][OH-45] or W-60°<td rowspan="2">Other fire partitions0.5-hr[D-20][D-20][D-H-OH-20][OH-20] or W-30°1-hr[D-H-45][D-H-45][D-H-45][OH-45] or W-60°Smoke barriers0.5-hr[D-H-20][D-H-20][D-H-20][OH-20] or W-30°<td rowspan="4">Exterior wallsa1-hr[D-20][D-20][D-H-OH-45][OH-45] or W-60°3-hr[D-H-90][D-H-W-90]W-180°[OH-90] or W-180°2-hr[D-H-90][D-H-W-90]W-120°[OH-90] or W-120°1-hr[D-H-45][D-H-45][D-H-45][OH-45] or W-60°</table>

a. Markings in brackets [ ] are fire-protection-rated glazing. Fire-protection-rated glazing in doors, sidelights and transoms meets NFPA 252. Fire protection-rated glazing in windows meets NFPA 257 or UL 9.

b. Fire-resistance-rated glazing meeting ASTM E119 or UL 263.

c. Glazing meeting both the standard for fire-protection-rated glazing in fire doors (NFPA 252) and the standard fire-resistance-rated glazing (ASTM E119 or UL 263).

d. Glazing requirements where protected openings are required by Table 705.8.

e. Only openings necessary for egress are allowed in exit access stairways and interior exit stairs.

FIGURE 716.1.2.2(2)

MARKINGS OF FIRE-RATED GLAZING \( ^{a} \)

===== Page 0780 =====
FIGURE 717.1.1
HORIZONTAL DUCT BETWEEN TWO SHAFTS

FIGURE 717.5
FIRE DAMPERS IN RATED WALL

===== Page 0781 =====
FIGURE 717.5.2(1)

EXAMPLES OF WHERE FIRE DAMPERS ARE NOT REQUIRED

===== Page 0782 =====
FIGURE 717.5.2(2)
EXAMPLES OF WHERE FLEXIBLE DUCTWORK IS ALLOWED

FIGURE 717.5.3(1)
FIRE DAMPERS—EXCEPTION 1

===== Page 0783 =====
FIGURE 717.5.3(2)
FIRE DAMPERS—EXCEPTION 1.4

===== Page 0784 =====
FIGURE 717.5.4(1)
FIRE DAMPERS—EXCEPTION 1

FIGURE 717.5.4(2)
FIRE DAMPERS—EXCEPTION 3

===== Page 0785 =====
FIGURE 717.6.1(1)
AIR DUCT PENETRATION OF A HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY

FIGURE 717.6.1(2)
AIR DUCT PENETRATION OF A HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY

===== Page 0786 =====
FIGURE 717.6.3(1)
DUCT PENETRATIONS OF NONFIRE-RESISTANCE-RATED ASSEMBLIES

===== Page 0787 =====
FIGURE 717.6.3(2)

FIRE DAMPERS IN DUCTS PENETRATING NONFIRE-RESISTANCE-RATED ASSEMBLIES

===== Page 0788 =====
FIGURE 718.2.3(1)
FIREBLOCKING—SOFFIT

FIGURE 718.2.3(2)
FIREBLOCKING—DROP CEILING

===== Page 0789 =====
FIGURE 718.2.3(3)
FIREBLOCKING—COVE CEILING

FIGURE 718.2.4
FIREBLOCKING—STAIRS

===== Page 0790 =====
FIGURE 718.2.7
FIREBLOCKING—CONCEALED FLOOR SPACES

FIGURE 718.3
DRAFTSTOPPING—CONCEALED FLOOR SPACES, OTHER GROUP

===== Page 0791 =====
FIGURE 720.2
CONCEALED INSULATION

SOLID CONCRETE WALL

<table><td rowspan="6">Material<td rowspan="6">Item Number<td rowspan="2" colspan="2">Construction<td colspan="4">Minimum Finished Thickness Face-to-Face (mm)4 Hour3 Hour2 Hour1 Hour<td colspan="2">Siliceous aggregate concrete17515512587.5<td colspan="2">Carbondate aggregate concrete165142.511580<td colspan="2">Sand-lightweight concrete1351159567.5<td colspan="2">Light weight concrete127.51109062.5</table>

FIGURE 721.1(2)(a)
CONCRETE WALL

===== Page 0792 =====
FACE LAYER JOINTS OFFSET 600 mm FROM BASE LAYER JOINTS, 37.5 mm TYPEG DRYWALL SCREWS PLACED 50 mm BACK ON EITHER SIDE OF FACE LAYER END JOINTS, 300 mm O.C.

FIGURE 721.1(3)
WOOD FLOOR TRUSS

FIGURE 721.1.1(1)
STEEL COLUMN ENCASED IN CONCRETE

FIGURE 721.1.1(2)

REINFORCING STEEL IN CONCRETE COLUMNS, BEAMS, GIRDERS AND TRUSSES

===== Page 0793 =====
THICKNESS OF INSIDE WYTHE, mm

THICKNESS OF INSIDE WYTHE OF SAND-LIGHTWEIGHT CONCRETE, mm

FIGURE 722.2.1.2

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS OF TWO-WYTHE CONCRETE WALLS

===== Page 0794 =====
FIGURE 722.2.1.3.1
CERAMIC FIBER JOINT PROTECTION

FIGURE 722.2.2.1.2
DETERMINATION OF SLAB THICKNESS FOR SLOPING SOFFITS

===== Page 0795 =====
NEGLECT SHADED AREA IN CALCULATION OF EQUIVALENT THICKNESS

FIGURE 722.2.2.1.3
SLABS WITH RIBBED OR UNDULATING SOFFITS

THICKNESS OF NORMAL WEIGHT CONCRETE BASE SLAB (mm)

THICKNESS OF SAND-LIGHTWEIGHT CONCRETE BASE SLAB (mm)

FIGURE 722.2.2.2
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS FOR TWO-COURSE CONCRETE FLOORS

===== Page 0796 =====
CHAPTER 7 - FIRE AND SMOKE PROTECTION FEATURES

FIGURE 22.2.2.3(D)
RESISTANCE RATING FOR CONCRETE ROOF ASSEMBLIES

===== Page 0797 =====
THICKNESS OF CONCRETE BASE SLAB (mm)

THICKNESS OF CONCRETE BASE SLAB (mm)

FIGURE 722.2.2.3(2)
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS FOR CONCRETE ROOF ASSEMBLIES

FIGURE 722.5.1(1)

DETERMINATION OF THE HEATED PERIMETER OF STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS

===== Page 0798 =====
1. Structural steel column, either wide flange or tubular shapes.

2. Type X gypsum board or gypsum panel products in accordance with ASTM C 1177, C 1178, C 1278, C 1396 or C 1658. The total thickness of gypsum board or gypsum panel products calculated as h in Section 722.5.1.2 shall be applied vertically to an individual column using one of the following methods:

1. As a single layer with no horizontal joints.

2. As multiple layers with no horizontal joints permitted in any layer.

3. As multiple layers with horizontal joints staggered not less than 300 mm vertically between layers and not less than 2.4 m vertically in any single layer. The total required thickness of gypsum board or gypsum panel products shall be determined on the basis of the specified fire-resistance rating and the weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio (W/D) of the column. For fire-resistance ratings of 2 hours or less, one of the required layers of gypsum board or gypsum panel product may be applied to the exterior of the sheet steel column covers with 25 mm long Type S screws spaced 25 mm from the wallboard edge and 200 mm on center. For such installations, 0.38 mm minimum thickness galvanized steel corner beads with 40 mm legs shall be attached to the wallboard with Type S screws spaced 300 mm on center.

3. For fire-resistance ratings of 3 hours or less, the column covers shall be fabricated from 0.61 mm minimum thickness galvanized or stainless steel. For 4-hour fire-resistance ratings, the column covers shall be fabricated from 0.61 mm minimum thickness stainless steel. The column covers shall be erected with the Snap Lock or Pittsburgh joint details. For fire-resistance ratings of 2 hours or less, column covers fabricated from 0.68 mm minimum thickness galvanized or stainless steel shall be permitted to be erected with lap joints. The lap joints shall be permitted to be located anywhere around the perimeter of the column cover. The lap joints shall be secured with 12.5 mm-long No. 8 sheet metal screws spaced 300 mm on center. The column covers shall be provided with a minimum expansion clearance of 10 mm per linear meter between the ends of the cover and any restraining construction.

## FIGURE 722.5.1(2)

## GYPSUM-PROTECTED STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS WITH SHEET STEEL COLUMN COVERS

===== Page 0799 =====
1. Structural steel column, either wide flange or tubular shapes.

2. 40 mm deep studs fabricated from 0.45 mm minimum thickness galvanized steel with 33 or 37-mm legs. The length of the steel studs shall be 12.5 mm less than the height of the assembly.

3. Type X gypsum board or gypsum panel products in accordance with ASTM C177, C1178, C1278, C1396 or C1658. The total thickness of gypsum board or gypsum panel products calculated as h in Section 722.5.1.2 shall be applied vertically to an individual column using one of the following methods:

1. As a single layer with no horizontal joints.

2. As multiple layers with no horizontal joints permitted in any layer.

3. As multiple layers with horizontal joints staggered not less than 300 mm vertically between layers and not less than 2440 mm vertically in any single layer. The total required thickness of gypsum board or gypsum panel products shall be determined on the basis of the specified fire-resistance rating and the weight-to-heated-perimeter ratio (W/D) of the column.

4. Galvanized 0.38 mm minimum thickness steel corner beads with 40 mm legs attached to the gypsum board or gypsum panel products with 25 mm-long Type S screws spaced 300 mm on center.

5. No. 18 SWG steel tie wires spaced 600 on center.

6. Sheet metal angles with 50 mm legs fabricated from 0.56 mm minimum thickness galvanized steel.

7. Type S screws, 25 mm long, shall be used for attaching the first layer of gypsum board or gypsum panel product to the steel studs and the third layer to the sheet metal angles at 600 mm on center. Type S screws 45 mm long shall be used for attaching the second layer of gypsum board or gypsum panel product to the steel studs and the fourth layer to the sheet metal angles at 300 mm on center. Type S screws 57 mm long shall be used for attaching the third layer of gypsum board or gypsum panel product to the steel studs at 300 mm on center.

## FIGURE 722.5.1(3)

## GYPSUM-PROTECTED STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS WITH STEEL STUD/SCREW ATTACHMENT SYSTEM

===== Page 0800 =====
WEIGHT-TO-HEATED PERIMETER RATIO (W/D)

FIGURE 722.5.1(4)

FIRE RESISTANCE OF STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS PROTECTED WITH VARIOUS THICKNESSES OF TYPE X GYPSUM WALLBOARD

a. The W/D ratios for typical wide flange columns are listed in Table 722.5.1(1). For other column shapes, the W/D ratios shall be determined in accordance with Section 722.5.1.1.

===== Page 0801 =====
FIGURE 722.5.1(5)

WIDE FLANGE STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS WITH SPRAYED FIRE-RESISTANT MATERIALS

(a) PRECAST CONCRETE COLUMN COVERS

(b) CONCRETE ENCASED STRUCTURAL TUBE

(c) CONCRETE ENCASED WUDE-FLANGE SHAPE

a. When the inside perimeter of the concrete protection is not square, L shall be taken as the average of  \( L_{1} \)  and  \( L_{2} \) . When the thickness of concrete cover is not constant, h shall be taken as the average of  \( h_{1} \)  and  \( h_{2} \) .

b. Joints shall be protected with a minimum 25 mm thickness of ceramic fiber blanket but in no case less than one-half the thickness of the column cover (see Section 722.2.1.3).

FIGURE 722.5.1(6)

CONCRETE PROTECTED STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS \( ^{a,b} \)

W SHAPE COLUMN

STEEL PIPE COLUMN

STRUCTURAL TUBE COLUMN

d = Depth of a wide flange column, outside diameter of pipe column, or outside dimension of structural tubing column (mm).

 \( f_{web} \)  = Thickness of web of wide flange column (mm).

w = Width of flange of wide flange column (mm).

FIGURE 722.5.1(7)

CONCRETE OR CLAY MASONRY PROTECTED STRUCTURAL STEEL COLUMNS

===== Page 0802 =====
W 310 x 202

FIGURE 722.5.1.2.1
EXAMPLE—STEEL COLUMN PROTECTED WITH WALLBOARD

ILLUSTRATION OF THE PROCEDURE FOR DETERMINING THE MATERIAL DEPENDENT CONSTANTS FOR SPRAY-APPLIED CEMENTITIOUS AND MATERIAL FIBER FIRE PROTECTION MATERIAL

FIGURE 722.5.1.3
EXAMPLE—SPRAY-APPLIED MATERIALS,
FIRE ENDURANCE TEST DATA

===== Page 0803 =====
FIGURE 722.5.2

DETERMINATION OF THE HEATED PERIMETER OF STRUCTURAL STEEL BEAMS AND GIRDERS

FIGURE 722.6

EXAMPLE—WOOD STUD WALL WITH WALLBOARD

===== Page 0804 =====
This page left intentionally blank

