===== Page 0253 =====
# CHAPTER 4—SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON OCCUPANCY AND USE

## General Comments

The provisions of Chapter 4 are supplemental to the remainder of the code. Chapter 4 contains provisions that may alter requirements found elsewhere in the code; however, the general requirements of the code still apply unless modified within the chapter. For example, the height and area limitations for occupancies unless Chapter 4 contains height and area limitations. In this case, the limitations in Chapter 4 supersede those in other sections. An example of this is the height and area limitations given in Section 406.5.4, which supersede the limitations given in Table 504.3, Table 504.4 and Table 506.2 for open parking garages.

The Saudi Fire Code (SBC 801) contains provisions applicable to the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials or devices and, therefore, must also be complied with where addressing such occupancies as those involving flammable and combustible liquids. Similarly, SBC 501 and SBC 701 include provisions for specific applications, such as hazardous exhaust systems and hazardous material piping.

In some instances, it may not be necessary to apply the provisions of Chapter 4. For example, where a covered mall building complies with the provisions of the code for the occupancies within the building, then Section 402 does not apply. However, other sections that address a use, process or operation must be applied to that specific occupancy, such as Sections 410, 411 and 414.

## Purpose

The purpose of Chapter 4 is to combine in one chapter the provisions of the code applicable to special uses and occupancies. Hazardous materials and operations may occur in more than one group; therefore, the applicable provisions for the specific hazardous occupancy or operation apply to multiple groups. Also, while the provisions for all structures are interrelated to form an overall protection system, by providing requirements for specific occupancies in Chapter 4 the package of protection features is more easily identified.
Chapter 4 contains the requirements for protecting uses and occupancies. The provisions in this chapter reflect those occupancies and groups that require special consideration and are not addressed elsewhere in the code. The chapter includes requirements for buildings and conditions that apply to one or more groups, such as high-rise buildings or atriums. Special uses may also imply specific occupancies and operations, such as for Groups H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5; application of flammable finishes; combustible storage; or a specific occupancy within a much larger occupancy, such as covered mall buildings, motor-vehicle-related occupancies, special amusement buildings and aircraft-related occupancies. Finally, in order that the overall package of protection features can be easily understood, occupancies such as Groups I-2 and I-3, live/work units and underground buildings are addressed.

## SECTION 401 SCOPE

401.1 Detailed occupancy and use requirements. In addition to the occupancy and construction requirements in this code, the provisions of this chapter apply to the occupancies and uses described herein.

This section provides guidance on how Chapter 4 is to be applied with respect to other sections of the code. Section 401.1 indicates that all other provisions of the code apply except as modified by Chapter 4.

The requirements contained in Chapter 4 are intended to apply to special uses and occupancies, as well as special construction features as defined in various sections in this chapter. These requirements are applicable in addition to other chapters of the code.

## SECTION 402 COVERED MALL AND OPEN MALL BUILDINGS

402.1 Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to buildings or structures defined herein as covered or open mall buildings not exceeding three floor levels at any point nor more than three stories above grade plane. Except as specifically required by this section, covered and open mall buildings shall meet applicable provisions of this code.

===== Page 0254 =====
Exceptions:

1. Foyers and lobbies of Group B, R-1 and R-2 occupancies are not required to comply with this section.

2. Buildings need not comply with the provisions of this section where they totally comply with other applicable provisions of this code.

This section primarily addresses shopping centers with a maximum of three levels that consist of one or more sizeable businesses, typically department stores, known as anchor buildings, and numerous smaller retail stores, all of which are interconnected by means of a mall or common pedestrian way. See Commentary Figure 402.1. The mall may be covered, providing a climate-controlled environment, or open to the sky. The complex may include movie theaters, bowling lanes, ice arenas, offices, and dining. Historically, anchor buildings were large department stores, and malls remain attached to department stores, but under this section, anchor buildings can contain any occupancy with the exception of a Group H. The complex may also include single- or multiple-level buildings, with a vast majority of shopping centers being one or two levels, and with an occasional mezzanine. Many malls contain large food courts with a variety of food vendors surrounding a common seating area. This section addresses the special considerations associated with covered or open mall buildings, including construction, egress and fire protection systems. It does not, in general, apply to the anchor buildings around the perimeter of the covered or open mall building. To be considered an anchor building for purposes of applying the code, the building must have complete egress facilities, including the required number and capacity of exits, independent of the covered or open mall building.

Originally, the provisions of this section applied to the typical covered mall building: a one- to three-level structure consisting primarily of retail space and a covered pedestrian way. More recently, other types of buildings, such as airport passenger terminals and office centers, have also been constructed in accordance with this section.

Malls with an unroofed common pedestrian way, or open malls, are becoming common in the "sun belt" areas of the country and in similar climates around the world. The code includes open malls within the broader definition of covered mall building and allows the same benefits of the covered mall provisions, because an open-to-the-sky mall provides equivalent or better life safety and property protection. The key to the open mall concept is to have everything a covered mall building would have, except for the roof over the mall area. Without a roof over the mall area and with required openings from the grade level to the sky above, natural ventilation is provided, and mechanical smoke control is no longer necessary in the mall area and adjoining tenant spaces.

This section is not intended to apply to the foyers and lobbies of business and residential occupancies that may contain retail spaces, small restaurants and offices unrelated to the use of upper stories. Where these lobbies have multiple levels open to each other, the provisions of Section 404, Atriums, may apply. In all such cases, the provisions for mixed occupancies found in Section 508 would apply. This section is also not intended to apply to large-footprint retail buildings, which may include smaller retail spaces, such as banks, florists or coffee stands, around the perimeter of a central sales area. These buildings do not provide the intended concept of a central pedestrian mall that is distinct from the surrounding tenant spaces.

Covered or open mall buildings that comply with all other applicable provisions of the code need not comply with the provisions of this section; however, covered or open mall buildings that are designed and constructed to comply with the provisions of this section must also comply with the provisions of the code that are not otherwise modified in this section. For example, the egress provisions in Section 402.8 are applicable to covered or open mall buildings designed in accordance with this section. The provisions in Chapter 10 related to door swing and stairways are also applicable, since Section 402 contains no similar provisions.

402.1.1 Open mall building perimeter line. For the purpose of this code, a perimeter line shall be established. The perimeter line shall encircle all buildings and structures that comprise the open mall building and shall encompass any open-air interior walkways, open-air courtyards or similar open-air spaces. The perimeter line shall define the extent of the open mall building. Anchor buildings and parking structures shall be outside of the perimeter line and are not considered as part of the open mall building.

Where the intent is to apply the open mall building provisions of Section 402, it is necessary to establish a building perimeter line that can be used for the application of various special requirements, such as those regarding travel distance in Section 402.8.5. As shown in Commentary Figure 402.1.1, the perimeter line

===== Page 0255 =====
encloses all portions of the open mall building, including open-air walkways and spaces, but does not enclose any anchor buildings or parking garages adjacent to the open mall building. The designer has the discretion as to the relative location of the perimeter line, similar to the discretion they have to place an assumed imaginary line between two buildings located on the same lot. But even with that discretion, it is anticipated that the perimeter line will, in essence, enclose the same space as exterior walls would in a covered mall building.

402.2 Open space. A covered mall building and attached anchor buildings and parking garages shall be surrounded on all sides by a permanent open space or not less than 18 m. An open mall building and anchor buildings and parking garages adjoining the perimeter line shall be surrounded on all sides by a permanent open space of not less than 18 m.

Exception: The permanent open space of 18 m shall be permitted to be reduced to not less than 12 m, provided the following requirements are met:

1. The reduced open space shall not be allowed for more than 75 percent of the perimeter of the covered or open mall building and anchor buildings.

2. The exterior wall facing the reduced open space shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 3 hours.

3. Openings in the exterior wall facing the reduced open space shall have opening protectives with a fire protection rating of not less than 3 hours.

4. Group E, H, I or R occupancies are not located within the covered or open mall building or anchor buildings.

One fundamental aspect of the covered mall building concept is that significant open space be provided around the perimeter of the entire building. The open space serves two key roles: separation of these buildings from other buildings and ample space on all sides for firefighting operations. The required minimum open space of 18 m must also be provided at any anchor buildings and parking garages attached to the covered mall building. In all cases the open space can occur either within public ways surrounding the site, or by yards provided on the lot between the covered mall building and the lot lines, or a combination of yards and public ways. Where a yard is used to achieve the open space, it must be on the same lot as the building receiving the benefit. With respect to the 18 m requirement, the entire width of the public way can be included. The open space must be provided in all directions around the perimeter of the building, not just measured at right angles to the building (see Commentary Figure 507.2). A similar degree of open space is required to surround open mall buildings and any adjacent anchor buildings and parking garages.

The exception allows covered or open mall buildings to reduce the required open space around the building in the same manner as unlimited area buildings regulated in Section 507. Where permitted in Section 507, unlimited area buildings require an open space around the building of 18 m to prevent exposure fire spread. Section 507.2.1 permits five of the nine categories of unlimited area buildings to have a reduced open space of only 12 m. This reduction is permitted in these locations where the exterior wall in the required space area is rated for not less than 3 hours and does not include more than 75 percent of the building perimeter. A significant majority of the uses described in Section 507 are found in the definition of a covered or open mall building. Therefore, it can be assumed that the fire load within a mall is similar to the fire load permitted in a code-compliant unlimited area building. Since the intent of the open space requirement is to prevent fire spread from one building to another and the fire loads are similar, allowing covered or open mall buildings to be subject to the same separation requirements as other unlimited area buildings does not reduce the level of fire protection afforded. The fourth requirement of the exception aligns this section with the occupancies permitted to use the unlimited area provisions of Section 507.2.1. Groups E, H, I and R occupancies are not prohibited from being within a covered or open mall building or an anchor store, but the exception would prohibit the use of reduced open space where one of these occupancies was a part of the covered or open mall building or anchor building.

402.3 Lease plan. Each owner of a covered mall building or of an open mall building shall provide both the building and fire departments with a lease plan showing the location of each occupancy and its exits after the certificate of occupancy has been issued. Modifications or changes in occupancy or use from that shown on the lease plan shall not be made without prior approval of the building official.

The required lease plan can be submitted after the certificate of occupancy has been issued because many times the developer does not have the information at the time of construction. The location of tenant separations may not be known until leases are negotiated with prospective tenants. This may occur after the mall has opened.

===== Page 0256 =====
During initial construction, it is anticipated that the building department will require tenant improvements to be submitted through the building permit process. After tenant spaces are prepared for occupancy and the lease plan is developed, subsequent modifications and changes must be submitted for approval prior to commencing construction or changing the use. It is important that the fire department receives copies of current lease plans, since not only does this help the fire department while performing fire prevention inspections, the lease plans also assist in fire department response to an emergency.

402.4 Construction. The construction of covered and open mall buildings, anchor buildings and parking garages associated with a mall building shall comply with Sections 402.4.1 through 402.4.3

A number of construction-related provisions are specific to covered and open mall buildings, anchor buildings and associated parking garages. Such buildings are regulated in this section for allowable floor area and height, type of construction, and fire-resistance rated separations. The various requirements in these code sections are illustrated in Commentary Figure 402.4.

402.4.1 Area and types of construction. The building area and type of construction of covered mall or open mall buildings, anchor buildings and parking garages shall comply with this section.

Specific construction requirements and area allowances are provided for mall buildings, anchor buildings and parking garages in Sections 402.4.1.1, 402.4.1.2 and 402.4.1.3, respectively.

402.4.1.1 Covered and open mall buildings. The building area of any covered mall or open mall building shall not be limited provided that the covered mall or open mall building does not exceed three floor levels at any point nor three stories above grade plane, and is of Type I, II, III or IV construction.

Covered or open mall buildings are considered to be special types of unlimited area buildings and are exempt from the allowable area limitations of Section 506 where they are limited to not more than three stories above grade plane. It should be noted that the height limitations in meter, specified in Table 504.3 based on the type of construction classification, are applicable to covered or open mall buildings. The allowance of an unlimited area is also based on the restriction of construction types to noncombustible (Types I and II), noncombustible/combustible (Type III) and heavy timber (Type IV). It assumes an effective automatic sprinkler system is provided in accordance with Section 402.5.

402.4.1.2 Anchor buildings. The building area and building height of any anchor building shall be based on the type of construction as required by Section 503 as modified by Sections 504 and 506.

Exception: The building area of any anchor building shall not be limited provided that the anchor building is not more than three stories above grade plane, and is of Type I, II, III or IV construction.

Anchor buildings, although attached to the mall building, can be treated as separate buildings with respect to building height, building area and construction type. For example, where a mall is limited to three stories, the attached anchor building built of Type I-A construction could be a high-rise building.

According to the exception, where the anchor building is limited to the same limits as the mall building, the anchor building can also be of unlimited area.

402.4.1.3 Parking garage. The building area and building height of any parking garage, shall be based on the type of construction as required by Sections 406.5 and 406.6, respectively.

This section provides a reminder that the construction of parking garages is regulated by the general provisions found in Sections 406.5 and 406.6 and that they are not regulated by the covered mall building's type of construction. It also clarifies that the garage is not included in the unlimited area allowance given to the mall building and anchor stores.

402.4.2 Fire-resistance-rated separation. Fire-resistance rated separation is not required between tenant spaces and the mall. Fire-resistance-rated separation is not required between a food court and adjacent tenant spaces or the mall.

From an operational point of view, separating the tenant space from the mall is not practical in that customer flow would be restricted and, therefore, detract from the merchandising purpose of covered or open malls. Historical experience and reliability data on automatic sprinkler performance indicate that a separation between the tenant space and the mall is not warranted.

402.4.2.1 Tenant separations. Each tenant space shall be separated from other tenant spaces by a fire partition complying with Section 708. A tenant separation wall is not required between any tenant space and the mall.

Covered mall buildings are essentially large unlimited area mixed-occupancy buildings. Rather than complying with Section 508.3 or

===== Page 0257 =====
508.4, the building has a series of protections including the tenant separations specified in this section. In order to limit the spread of smoke, tenant separation walls are required to be fire partitions (see Section 708) having a fire-resistance rating of at least 1 hour and extending from the floor to the underside of the ceiling (see Commentary Figure 402.4). Extending tenant separations to the floor slab or roof deck above is not always practical or possible because of operation of the heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) system. The effectiveness of the automatic sprinkler system is also a reason for not requiring tenant separations to extend above the ceiling, including attic spaces (see Section 708.4, Exception 4).

The open mall “building” provides a unique question regarding separation of tenant spaces. The open mall building may likely be a collection of separate structures treated as one open mall “building.” The extent of the open mall building will be established by the perimeter line. Where a separate structure within an open mall contains multiple tenant spaces, those spaces need to be separated as required in this section.

Within the perimeter line, the walls between the tenant spaces and the mall will be “interior walls” to the whole open mall building complex, but they are also exterior walls as they separate interior from exterior environments. As part of a complex of buildings, the exterior walls of each individual tenant space facing the mall will not need to meet the wall and opening protection of Section 705, but do need to comply with other exterior wall provisions of Chapter 14. In most cases where there are separate “buildings” within the perimeter line, there will be a walkway—or pedestrian mall—between the buildings. Even where these are off the main mall, these are still considered tenant walls facing the mall. The walls on the exterior face of the open mall “building,” those adjoining the perimeter line, would be subject to the provisions of Section 705.

402.4.2.2 Anchor building separation. An anchor building shall be separated from the covered or open mall building by fire walls complying with Section 706.

Exceptions:

1. Anchor buildings of not more than three stories above grade plane that have an occupancy classification the same as that permitted for tenants of the mall building shall be separated by 2-hour fire-resistance-rated fire barriers complying with Section 707.
2. The exterior walls of anchor buildings separated from an open mall building by an open mall shall comply with Table 705.5.

In general, anchor buildings are typically viewed as being separate from the covered or open mall building (see commentary, Sections 402.1 and 402.4.1). As separate buildings, the code requires that a fire wall complying with Section 706 be constructed.

Exception 1 may be used in situations where the occupancy and size limitations of the anchor building are the same as what would be permitted for any other tenant within the covered mall building. In those situations, the code permits the separation to be constructed as a fire barrier instead of as a fire wall. The exception would not be applicable where the anchor building was over three stories above grade plane or where it contains an occupancy that was not normally permitted within the mall. An example would be a high-rise office building or a hotel that was connected with the covered mall building (see Commentary Figure 402.4 and commentary, Section 402.4.2.2.1).

For an open mall building where the anchor building is actually a separate building, the application of a fire wall may not be appropriate, but since it is considered a separate structure even under the covered mall scenario, it is appropriate to have the anchor building provide exterior wall protection specified in Table 705.5. This allowance is set forth in Exception 2.

A growing trend in the development of mall buildings and anchor buildings is the desire of the operators of the businesses in an anchor building to own the structure of the anchor building as well as a distinct parcel of land on which the anchor building sits. The original intent of the mall provisions was to apply to one building, or a collection of buildings, located on one lot under the control of one owner. Various provisions assume a single "lot" for the covered mall and associated anchor buildings and parking structures. Where the mall and associated buildings are managed as a single complex, strict interpretation would eliminate the application of these provisions to such a complex. Application of Section 402 provisions to a situation where the mall and anchor buildings are separate ownership lots would be problematic, requiring special legal and technical considerations and treatment by the building official.

402.4.2.2.1 Openings between anchor building and mall. Except for the separation between Group R-1 sleeping units and the mall, openings between anchor buildings of Type IA, IB,

===== Page 0258 =====
IIA or IIB construction and the mall need not be protected.

As with tenant separations, openings between the anchor building and the pedestrian area of the mall need not be protected. Such separations would defeat the merchandising purpose of covered malls by restricting customer flow and visual access. While the openings may be unprotected, the separations between the anchor building and all tenant spaces in the covered mall building are to be constructed as required in Section 402.4.2.2 for a fire wall (see commentary, Section 706) or fire barrier (see commentary, Section 707) since the anchor building is considered a separate building (see Commentary Figure 402.4).

402.4.2.3 Parking garages. An attached garage for the storage of passenger vehicles having a capacity of not more than nine persons and open parking garages shall be considered as a separate building where it is separated from the covered or open mall building or anchor building by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Parking garages, which are separated from covered mall buildings, open mall buildings or anchor buildings, shall comply with the provisions of Table 705.5.

Pedestrian walkways and tunnels that connect garages to mall buildings or anchor buildings shall be constructed in accordance with Section 3104.

Buildings adjacent to mall buildings are typically considered separate buildings provided they are separated by exterior walls or fire walls. In recognition of the limited hazard presented by attached garages and open parking garages, this section permits such structures to be considered separate buildings, where fire barriers and horizontal assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of at least 2 hours are provided. See the commentary to Section 707 relative to the construction of fire barriers and Section 711 relative to the construction of horizontal assemblies.

The 2-hour fire-resistance rating is consistent with the requirements of Table 508.4 for Groups M and S-2 occupancies. Where the 2-hour fire barrier or horizontal assembly is not provided, the parking structure can be considered part of the covered mall building and be limited. Table 705.5, regulating exterior wall protection, is applicable for those parking garages that are not attached to the covered or open mall building or anchor buildings. See the commentary to Section 3104 for the requirements related to any pedestrian walkways or tunnels that connect the garages to mall buildings or anchor stores.

402.4.3 Open mall construction. Floor assemblies in, and roof assemblies over, the open mall of an open mall building shall be open to the atmosphere for not less than 6 m, measured perpendicular from the face of the tenant spaces on the lowest level, from edge of balcony to edge of balcony on upper floors and from edge of roof line to edge of roof line. The openings within, or the unroofed area of, an open mall shall extend from the lowest/grade level of the open mall through the entire roof assembly. Balconies on upper levels of the mall shall not project into the required width of the opening.

An open mall requires a minimum open area width of 6 m between opposing structures from the lowest grade level to the sky above. This dimension aligns with Section 402.8.1.1 minimum width for egress. The width of the opening is measured perpendicular from the face of the tenant spaces, essentially across the pedestrian mall. This is similar to the mall width for covered malls. The opening, or the unroofed area, must extend from the lowest grade level of the common open mall to the sky above. This will provide natural ventilation to all levels. Balconies on the upper levels are permitted but may not project into the required 6 m width. Pedestrian walkways and overhangs at the end locations of the open mall are permitted (see Commentary Figure 402.4.3).

402.4.3.1 Pedestrian walkways. Pedestrian walkways connecting balconies in an open mall shall be located not less than 6 m from any other pedestrian walkway.

Where pedestrian walkways are provided, they must be spatially separated in order to maintain the expected openness of the open mall area. The minimum required distance of 6 m is consistent with the minimum open space required between various buildings that make up an open mall building.

402.5 Automatic sprinkler system. Covered and open mall buildings and buildings connected shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, which shall comply with all of the following:

1 The automatic sprinkler system shall be complete and operative throughout occupied space in the mall building prior to occupancy of any of the tenant spaces. Unoccupied tenant spaces shall be similarly protected unless provided with approved alternative protection.

===== Page 0259 =====
2 Sprinkler protection for the mall of a covered mall building shall be independent from that provided for tenant spaces or anchor buildings.

3 Sprinkler protection for the tenant spaces of an open mall building shall be independent from that provided for anchor buildings.

4 Sprinkler protection shall be provided beneath exterior circulation balconies located adjacent to an open mall.

5 Where tenant spaces are supplied by the same system, they shall be independently controlled.

Exception: An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in spaces or areas of open parking garages separated from the covered or open mall building in accordance with Section 402.4.2.3 and constructed in accordance with Section 406.5.

The covered or open mall building and connected buildings, such as anchor buildings, must be protected with an automatic sprinkler system to protect life and property effectively. As has been discussed throughout the section, numerous allowances (such as reduced tenant separations and elimination of area limitations) are based on the effectiveness of the automatic sprinkler system.

The automatic sprinkler system is to be designed, installed, tested and maintained in accordance with Chapter 9, SBC 801 and NFPA 13. Additionally, the system must be installed such that any portion serving tenant spaces in a covered mall building may be shut down independently without affecting the operation of the systems protecting the mall area. This special feature is in recognition of the frequent need to shut down the system so that changes can be made to it as a result of tenant improvements and modifications.

In an open mall building, the sprinkler systems for the tenant spaces are to be separate from those provided for the anchor buildings. It is necessary that sprinkler protection for open mall buildings be extended to the underneath side of pedestrian walkways and exterior balconies used for circulation and egress purposes. Although the open mall itself requires no sprinkler protection, it is important that those areas below overhead walkways be provided with automatic sprinklers.

Section 909.12.3 requires operation of the sprinkler system to automatically activate the mechanical smoke control system (where a smoke control system is utilized). It is imperative that the zoning of the automatic sprinkler system match the zoning of the smoke control system. This is necessary so that the area where water flow has occurred will also be the area from which smoke is removed. Smoke control is only required where an atrium that connects three stories is present (see Section 402.7.2).

The exception clarifies that sprinkler protection need not be extended to open parking garages that are adequately separated from the covered mall building, open mall building or anchor store. The specific sprinkler system exception in this section takes precedence over the general sprinkler system requirements in Chapter 9. Section 102.1 states that where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. All other open parking garages with a fire area over 4460 m \( ^{2} \)  are required to be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system.

402.6 Interior finishes and features. Interior finishes within the mall and installations within the mall shall comply with Sections 402.6.1 through 402.6.4.

This section addresses one general fire safety feature (interior finishes) and three specific features commonly found in covered mall buildings. Such features are also addressed where applicable within the perimeter line of an open mall building.

402.6.1 Interior finish. Interior wall and ceiling finishes within the mall of a covered mall building and within the exits of covered or open mall buildings shall have a minimum flame spread index and smoke-developed index of Class B in accordance with Chapter 8. Interior floor finishes shall meet the requirements of Section 804.

Although Section 803 addresses the wall and ceiling finish requirements for mall building tenant spaces and anchor buildings based on the occupancies involved, Section 803 does not specifically state the requirements for interior finish within the mall of a covered mall building. In addition, it does not specify the interior wall and ceiling finish requirements for exits of open or covered mall buildings. Since a covered mall building is actually a mixed-use building, the most restrictive occupancy requirement should most likely apply. The use of the mall has gone beyond its original intent of providing a wide-open walking space for people. It has become clear that malls are assembly spaces themselves, not taking into account the tenant assembly spaces that open into them. Therefore, the mall spaces and exits are regulated for interior finishes in a manner similar to Group A requirements. The wall and ceiling finishes must have a minimum flame

===== Page 0260 =====
spread index and smoke-developed index of Class B.

402.6.2 Kiosks. Kiosks and similar structures (temporary or permanent) located within the mall of a covered mall building or within the perimeter line of an open mall building shall meet the following requirements:

1 Combustible kiosks or other structures shall not be located within a covered or open mall unless constructed of any of the following materials:

1.1 Fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Section 2303.2.

1.2 Foam plastics having a maximum heat release rate not greater than 100 kW when tested in accordance with the exhibit booth protocol in UL 1975 or when tested in accordance with NFPA 289 using the 20-kW ignition source.

1.3 Aluminum composite material (ACM) meeting the requirements of Class A interior finish in accordance with Chapter 8 when tested as an assembly in the maximum thickness intended.

2 Kiosks or similar structures located within the mall shall be provided with approved automatic sprinkler system and detection devices.

3 The horizontal separation between kiosks or groupings thereof and other structures within the mall shall be not less than 6 m.

4 Each kiosk or similar structure or groupings thereof shall have an area not greater than 30 m².

Other potential sources of combustibles within the mall area are kiosks and similar structures. As with the restrictions of Section 402.6.4 on plastic signs, in order to maintain the mall as a viable means of egress, the amount of combustibles within the mall must be minimized. The restriction on kiosk construction and location is also intended to minimize the potential for fire spread through the mall area. These restrictions apply to both permanent and temporary structures and are applicable to both covered and open mall buildings.

Kiosks and similar structures are permitted to be of noncombustible construction or may be of combustible construction where the provisions of Item 1 are followed. The code allows combustible kiosks to be made of fire-retardant-treated wood or certain foam plastics and aluminum composites that provide performance comparable to that of the fire-retardant treated wood. As such, the amount of combustibles within the mall and the potential for fire spread through the mall are minimized. Where the kiosk or similar structure has a cover, the automatic sprinkler system within the covered mall building will not be able to effectively control a fire within the kiosk (or similar structure) in the early stages of development. Suppression and detection devices must, therefore, be installed within such structures where there is anything that shields the mall sprinkler system from areas within the kiosk.

In order to minimize a fire exposure hazard, kiosks and similar structures must be located at least 6 m from each other or be situated in groups that are appropriately separated from other kiosks. Although the structure itself is often noncombustible or of the limited types of acceptable combustible materials, it is recognized that combustibles may be displayed within the structure and, therefore, the separation minimizes the potential for fire spread from kiosk to kiosk. If a series of kiosks do not have 6 m separating them, they can be treated as a group and would be limited to 30 m², as a group. The open space between individual kiosks in the group can be excluded from the aggregate area for determining the area of the group (see IBC Interpretation No. 11-07). Within a group of kiosks treated as one, there can be multiple "tenants" or one, and there are no specifics about the relative size of individual kiosks within the group (see IBC Interpretation Nos. 13-07 and 14-07). As required by Section 402.8.1.1, the kiosk must also be located at least 3 m from any projection of a tenant space.

To further control the use of kiosks and similar structures within the mall, their size is restricted to 30 m² or less. This area restriction attempts to minimize the potential for a significant fire within the mall area. A kiosk larger than 30 m² must be considered as a tenant space.
402.6.3 Play structures. Play structures located within a mall building or within the perimeter line of an open mall building shall comply with Section 424. The horizontal separation between play structures, kiosks and similar structures within the mall shall be not less than 6 m.

Indoor activity attractions for children and adults may include such things as jungle gyms, playhouses, climbing walls, laser tag facilities and a number of other activities with recreational structures. Where these structures exceed 3000 mm in height and 15 m² in area, the provisions of Section 424 must be followed. Play structures have to be separated from each other, as well as from kiosks and similar structures, by at least 6 m in order to limit the

===== Page 0261 =====
aggregate combustible fire loading created by such structures.

402.6.4 Plastic signs. Plastic signs affixed to the storefront of any tenant space facing a mall or open mall shall be limited as specified in Sections 402.6.4.1 through 402.6.4.5.

In order that the mall can be used as an exit access, combustible materials in the mall must be restricted; therefore, the size, area, location and amount of exposed plastic signs are restricted. This section restricts only plastic signs that are along the wall separating the tenant space from the mall (see Commentary Figure 402.6.4). The limit applies to both covered and open mall buildings. While the potential hazards of a plastic sign are somewhat dissipated in an open air mall, the pedestrian malls within an open mall are still considered space within a mall and are used for egress from the complex; therefore, appropriate protections are needed. Where the sign housing and face panels are noncombustible or glass, there are no limitations. Light-transmitting plastic interior signs not located in the mall, such as those located within an individual tenant space, must comply with the requirements of Chapter 26.

402.6.4.1 Area. Plastic signs shall be not more than 20 percent of the wall area facing the mall.

The signs located on the wall facing the mall must not exceed 20 percent of the wall area. The restrictions on size, coupled with the restrictions on location and height, are intended to prevent fire spread via the plastic signs.

402.6.4.2 Height and width. Plastic signs shall be not greater than 900 mm in height, except that where the sign is vertical, the height shall be not greater than 2400 mm and the width shall be not greater than 900 mm.

Signs that are wider than they are tall (horizontal panels) must not be more than 900 mm in height. The width of signs is controlled by the maximum area (see Section 402.6.4.1) and the location restrictions with respect to adjacent tenant spaces (see Section 402.6.4.3). Vertical signs must not be more than 900 mm in width and 2400 mm in height and are also subject to the area and location restrictions of other sections. The restrictions are intended to minimize horizontal and vertical fire spread through the mall area via the signs.

402.6.4.3 Location. Plastic signs shall be located not less than 450 mm from adjacent tenants.

To minimize the potential for fire spread, plastic signs must be located at least 450 mm from adjacent tenant spaces.
402.6.4.4 Plastics other than foam plastics. Plastics other than foam plastics used in signs shall be light-transmitting plastics complying with Section 2606.4 or shall have a self-ignition temperature of  \( 343^{\circ} \) C or greater when tested in accordance with ASTM D1929, and a flame spread index not greater than 75 and smoke-developed index not greater than 450 when tested in the manner intended for use in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 or meet the acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.1.1 when tested in accordance with NFPA 286.

To minimize the potential fire hazard, light-transmitting plastic signs located in a mall must comply with the specific material requirements of Section 2606.4 (see commentary, Section 2606.4) or must meet one of the alternative test methods that are permitted. Additionally, the backs and edges of the sign must be encased to reduce the likelihood of ignition and fire spread.

402.6.4.4.1 Encasement. Edges and backs of plastic signs in the mall shall be fully encased in metal.

In order that the amount of exposed plastic materials in the mall is minimized, as well as to reduce the potential for ignition of a plastic panel, the edges and backs of plastic signs must be encased in metal. To conceptually understand this requirement, consider how easily a piece of paper ignites when a flame is held to its edge versus being held to the middle of the paper.

402.6.4.5 Foam plastics. Foam plastics used in signs shall have flame-retardant characteristics such that the sign has a maximum heat-release rate of 150 kilowatts when tested in accordance with UL 1975 or when tested in accordance with NFPA 289 using the 20-kW ignition source, and the foam plastics shall have the physical characteristics specified in this section. Foam plastics used in signs installed in accordance with Section 402.6.4 shall not be required to comply with the flame spread and smoke-developed indices specified in Section 2603.3.

Foam plastics that are used in signs located in a mall must comply with the provisions of Sections 402.6.4.5.1 and 402.6.4.5.2. The provisions of the code include specific material requirements for the foam plastics, such as the allowable heat-release rate, density and thickness permitted.

===== Page 0262 =====
402.6.4.5.1 Density. The density of foam plastics used in signs shall be not less than 320 kg per m \( ^{3} \) .

Foam plastics used in signs are limited to a minimum density of not less than 320 kg per m \( ^{3} \) . This limitation lessens the likelihood that the sign will add a significant fuel load to the tenant space entrance.

402.6.4.5.2 Thickness. The thickness of foam plastic signs shall not be greater than 12.5 mm.

The thickness of the foam plastic sign is also limited to lessen the likelihood that the sign will add a significant fuel load to the tenant space entrance.

402.7 Emergency systems. Covered and open mall buildings, anchor buildings and associated parking garages shall be provided with emergency systems complying with Sections 402.7.1 through 402.7.5.

The special allowances for covered and open mall buildings are available in great part due to the presence of several emergency fire protection systems within the building. In addition to the automatic sprinkler system required by Section 402.5, this section identifies those systems and methods by addressing standpipe systems, smoke control, standby power, emergency voice/alarm communication and fire department access to equipment.

402.7.1 Standpipe system. Covered and open mall buildings shall be equipped throughout with a standpipe system as required by Section 905.3.3.

This section provides a reminder to the code user and a direct reference to the section that regulates the need for standpipes or hose connections for covered or open mall buildings (see commentary, Section 905.3.3).

402.7.2 Smoke control. Atrium connecting three or more stories in a covered mall building shall be provided with a smoke control system in accordance with Section 909.

A smoke control system must be provided for all covered mall buildings that contain an atrium that connects more than two stories. "Atrium" is defined (Section 202) as a vertical space that is closed at the top connecting two or more stories in Group I-2 and I-3 occupancies or three or more stories in all other occupancies. Covered malls inherently contain unenclosed floor openings that may allow for the migration of smoke and hot gases resulting from a fire. See Sections 404.5 and 909 for a discussion of the requirements of the smoke control system, noting the exceptions listed for floor openings. Open malls and adjoining tenant spaces are not required to have a smoke control system because they are open at the top and would not meet the definition of an "atrium." However, individual tenant spaces that contain an atrium and are part of an open mall "building" are not exempted from the smoke control requirements.

402.7.3 Emergency power. Covered mall buildings greater than 4500 m \( ^{2} \)  in area and open mall buildings greater than 4500 m \( ^{2} \)  within the established perimeter line shall be provided with emergency power that is capable of operating the emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with Section 2702.

Covered and open mall buildings of a substantial size are required to be provided with emergency power only for the emergency voice/alarm communication system (see Section 2702.2.3). For means of egress illumination, see Section 1008.

402.7.4 Emergency voice/alarm communication system. Where the total floor area is greater than 4650 m \( ^{2} \)  within either a covered mall building or within the perimeter line of an open mall building, an emergency voice/alarm communication system shall be provided.

The fire department shall have access to any emergency voice/alarm communication systems serving a mall, required or otherwise. The systems shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

An emergency voice/alarm communication system is required to allow the fire department control and communication during an emergency situation. Such a system is required where the covered or open mall building exceeds a floor area of 4650 m \( ^{2} \)  (see commentary, Section 907.5.2.2). For open mall buildings, the threshold of 4650 m \( ^{2} \)  is based on the floor area within the building's perimeter line as described in Section 402.1.1.

402.7.5 Fire department access to equipment. Rooms or areas containing controls for air-conditioning systems or fire protection systems shall be identified for use by the fire department.

Consideration should be given to fire department access during an emergency. Fire department personnel may need to either determine that the fire protection systems are functioning properly or override the automatic features to manually activate or shut down a particular system. For this reason, the fire department must have access to controls for the air-conditioning and fire protection systems. To quickly gain access and so that the fire department personnel can properly operate them, the controls are to be clearly identified.

402.8 Means of egress. Covered mall buildings, open mall buildings and each tenant space within a

===== Page 0263 =====
mall building shall be provided with means of egress as required by this section and this code. Where there is a conflict between the requirements of this code and the requirements of Sections 402.8.1 through 402.8.8, the requirements of Sections 402.8.1 through 402.8.8 shall apply.

Covered mall buildings and open mall buildings, as well as each individual tenant space within the covered or open mall building, are required to have means of egress that comply with other provisions of the code especially Chapter 10. Keep in mind that the requirements of Section 402.8 will supersede some of the provisions of Chapter 10. In order to comply, travel through the mall area is considered as exit access and must comply with Section 402.8.5. Travel distance within a tenant space need only be measured to the entrance of the mall from the space (see Commentary Figure 402.8). As such, two distinct criteria must be met with regard to exit access travel distance: travel within the mall and travel within the tenant space.

402.8.1 Mall width. For the purpose of providing required egress, malls are permitted to be considered as corridors but need not comply with the requirements of Section 1005.1 of this code where the width of the mall is as specified in this section.

Pedestrian malls that serve as exit access routes for tenant space occupants are not required to comply with Section 1005.1. The design capacity of the mall width is already established by Section 402.8.1.1. No further egress width calculations are required by the code for mall corridors.

402.8.1.1 Minimum width. The aggregate clear egress width of the mall in either a covered or open mall building shall be not less than 6 m. The mall width shall be sufficient to accommodate the occupant load served. Any portion of the minimum required aggregate egress width shall be not less than 3 m measured to a height of 2400 mm between any projection of a tenant space bordering the mall and the nearest kiosk, vending machine, bench, display opening, food court or other obstruction to means of egress travel.

The minimum 6000 mm clear egress width of a mall is based on the need to provide adequate access to exits or, for open malls, to the "building perimeter line," which is the point where people transition from being within the open mall "building" to outside of the "building." Together with the automatic sprinkler system, the physical separation further reduces the need for a separation between tenant spaces and the mall.
In order that an aggregate clear width of 6000 mm is always provided in the mall, a minimum 3000 mm clear and unobstructed space is to be maintained to a height of 2400 mm in front of, adjacent to and parallel to the storefronts (tenant spaces). The requirement applies to kiosks, vending machines, benches, small stands, merchandise displays and any other potential obstruction to egress (see Commentary Figure 402.8.1.1).

402.8.2 Determination of occupant load. The occupant load permitted in any individual tenant space in a covered or open mall building shall be determined as required by this code. Means of egress requirements for individual tenant spaces shall be based on the occupant load thus determined.

Since the tenant spaces of covered or open mall buildings can be used for various occupancies, the design occupant loads will also vary. Although each tenant space contributes to the gross leasable area of Section 402.8.2.1, each must have its own occupant load calculated along with the applicable means of egress requirements. For example, a restaurant with its own dining area may occupy a tenant space. The design occupant load for this space is calculated in accordance with Table 1004.5 based on the assembly occupancy of the dining areas and on the commercial kitchen occupancy of the food preparation areas. Door swing direction and panic and fire exit hardware requirements would be based on this occupant load.

402.8.2.1 Occupant formula. In determining required means of egress of the mall, the number of occupants for whom means of egress are to be provided shall be based on gross leasable area of the covered or open mall building (excluding anchor buildings) and the occupant load factor as determined by Equation 4-1.

 \[ OLF=(0.00007)x(GLA)+2.3 \quad (4-1) \]

OLF = The occupant load factor (square meters per person).

GLA = The gross leasable area (square meters).

Exception: Tenant spaces attached to a covered or open mall building but with a means of egress system that is totally independent of the open mall of an open mall building or of a covered mall building shall not be considered as gross leasable area for determining the required means of egress for the mall building.

The capacity of the exits serving the covered and open mall buildings must satisfy the

===== Page 0264 =====
calculated occupant load based on the gross leasable area. The individually calculated occupant loads of tenant spaces under Section 402.8.2 are used for determining required means of egress from a tenant space. The individual tenant space occupant loads are not summed into the occupant load for the mall as determined by this section and the use of the occupant load factor (OLF). Occupant load factors were determined empirically by surveying more than 270 covered mall shopping centers, studying mercantile occupancy parking requirements [5.0 cars per 100 m² of gross leasable area] and observing the number of occupants per vehicle during peak seasons (4.0 per car).

The formula used for determining occupant load results in a smooth transition between the occupant load and the gross leasable area with a range of 30 to 50.

For example, where the gross leasable area of the covered or open mall building is 37,160 m², the calculated OLF is determined as follows:

 \[ \mathrm{OLF}=(0.00007)\times(37160)+2.3 \]

 \[ \mathrm{OLF}=4.9\mathrm{~m}^{2}\mathrm{~per~person} \]

Since the design occupant load factor cannot exceed 4.65 in accordance with Section 402.8.2.2, the required OLF would be 4.65 m \( ^{2} \)  per person.

If the gross leasable area of the mall building is 5000 m², the calculated OLF is determined as follows:

 \[ \mathrm{OLF}=(0.00007)\times(5109)+2.3 \]

 \[ \mathrm{OLF}=2.7\mathrm{~m}^{2}\mathrm{~per~person} \]

Since the OLF need not be less than 2.8 in accordance with Section 402.8.2.2, the required occupant load factor would be 2.8 m \( ^{2} \)  per person. The code would permit the use of an occupant load factor of 2.7, since it would result in a higher design occupant load and, consequently, increased width of exits.

In summary, there is a calculation of occupant load for tenant spaces that is used to determine the number of means of egress from a tenant space. The locations of the means of egress are determined under Sections 402.8.3 and 402.8.4. Then there is also a determination, calculated separately, of the occupant load of the covered or open mall building. That occupant load is determined by applying the OLF of this section to the net leasable area of the mall building (plus adding the occupant load of the food court). This occupant load is used to determine the number and width of exits from a mall under Sections 402.8.5 and 402.8.6.

402.8.2.2 OLF range. The occupant load factor (OLF) is not required to be less than 30 and shall not exceed 50.
Although not mandatory, an OLF of less than 2.8 may be used at the designer's discretion (see Section 1004.5.1). In no case should an OLF greater than 4.65 be used, since it would result in too small a design occupant load. It should be noted that Table 1004.5 assigns an OLF of 5.6 to mercantile occupancies. The 5.6 OLF would apply to stores not located in a mall. The assumption behind a lower OLF in malls is that malls attract larger numbers of shoppers than stand-alone stores. A lower OLF means more people in a given space. This results in greater width for egress elements such as corridors or more egress elements such as exit doors.

402.8.2.3 Anchor buildings. The occupant load of anchor buildings opening into the mall shall not be included in computing the total number of occupants for the mall.

Although anchor buildings are allowed access to the mall portions of the covered or open mall building, the occupant load of the mall does not have to be increased for this access. People may certainly discharge from the anchor building into the mall on their own accord; however, the anchor building is required to provide sufficient exits for its occupant load at locations other than the mall.

402.8.2.4 Food courts. The occupant load of a food court shall be determined in accordance with Section 1004. For the purposes of determining the means of egress requirements for the mall, the food court occupant load shall be added to the occupant load of the covered or open mall building as calculated in Section 402.8.2.1.

The occupant load for food courts must be determined in accordance with Section 1004. Typically, tables and chairs are provided for the public's use in a food court. As such, the design occupant load for a food court is usually calculated at a rate of one person for every 1.4 m² of net floor space for an unconcentrated assembly occupancy. The occupant loads for all food courts are added to the mall occupant load calculated in accordance with Section 402.8.2.1 and Equation 4-1. Food courts are not considered part of the gross leasable area of the mall; therefore, the occupant loads of the food courts must be calculated separately and then added to the overall covered or open mall building occupant load.

402.8.3 Number of means of egress. Wherever the distance of travel to the mall from any location within a tenant space used by persons other than employees is greater than 23 m or the tenant space has an occupant load of 50 or more, not fewer than two means of egress shall be provided.

===== Page 0265 =====
This section applies within each tenant space. It dictates the minimum number of paths of travel an occupant is to have available to avoid a fire incident in the occupied tenant space. While providing multiple egress doorways from every tenant space is unrealistic, a point does exist where alternative egress paths must be provided, based on the number of occupants at risk, the distance occupants must travel to reach the mall and the relative hazards associated with the occupancy of the space. The 23 m travel distance and the 49-person occupant load limitations represent an empirical judgment of the risks associated with a single means of egress from a tenant space based on the inherent risks associated with the occupancy (such as occupant mobility, occupant familiarity with the mall, occupant response and the fire growth rate). The requirement for two exits for 50 or more occupants applies to all occupants of the tenant space, including employees. The 23 m travel distance does not apply to employees. Employee only areas of the tenant space can require travel greater than 23 m to reach the mall or other exit. A second means of egress is not required in spaces with an occupant load less than 50.

402.8.4 Arrangements of means of egress. Assembly occupancies with an occupant load of 500 or more located within a covered mall building shall be so located such that their entrance will be immediately adjacent to a principal entrance to the mall and shall have not less than one-half of their required means of egress opening directly to the exterior of the covered mall building. Assembly occupancies located within the perimeter line of an open mall building shall be permitted to have their main exit open to the open mall.

* Tenant spaces that are assembly occupancies with an occupant load of 500 or more must be carefully located to minimize the hazards of egress. Movie theaters, and large restaurants must be located on an exterior wall of the covered mall building and adjacent to the mall's exits where their occupant loads exceed 499. A maximum of 50 percent of the means of egress from these assembly occupancies is permitted to discharge into the mall. Other means of egress from these tenant spaces must discharge directly to the exterior with a capacity of at least one half the occupant load. For open mall buildings, any assembly occupancy located with the building perimeter line is permitted to have its main exits open directly into the mall due to the decreased hazard level of an open, unroofed, mall compared to an enclosed and covered mall.
402.8.4.1 Anchor building means of egress. Required means of egress for anchor buildings shall be provided independently from the mall means of egress system. The occupant load of anchor buildings opening into the mall shall not be included in determining means of egress requirements for the mall. The path of egress travel of malls shall not exit through anchor buildings. Malls terminating at an anchor building where other means of egress has not been provided shall be considered as a dead-end mall.

* As indicated in the definition of “Anchor building” (see Section 202), the required means of egress for an anchor building must be provided independently of the mall and the means of egress from the mall. Since independent means of egress are provided, the occupant load of anchor buildings is not included in determining the means of egress requirements for the mall. Where independent means of egress are not provided, the space cannot be considered an anchor building and is to be treated as any other tenant space of the mall. As such, it would need to be included in the gross leasable area under Section 402.8.2.1.

402.8.5 Distance to exits. Within each individual tenant space in a covered or open mall building, the distance of travel from any point to an exit or entrance to the mall shall be not greater than 60 m. The distance of travel from any point within a mall of a covered mall building to an exit shall be not greater than 60 m. The maximum distance of travel from any point within an open mall to the perimeter line of the open mall building shall be not greater than 60 m.

* The maximum permissible travel distance from any point in the tenant space to the mall is 60 m. A similar 60 m limitation is applied from any point within the mall in a covered mall building to an exit, as well as from any point within the mall of an open mall building to the perimeter line. As such, the mall is treated like an aisle in a large store, the large store being the mall building. Although the distance is less than that permitted in Group M occupancies with an automatic sprinkler system, it must be recognized that this travel distance is measured from a point within the mall and not from the most remote point within the covered or open mall building (i.e., within a tenant space). Because of the uncertainty with respect to tenant improvements, it is more reliable to regulate travel distance within the mall instead of throughout the covered or open mall building.

402.8.6 Access to exits. Where more than one exit is required, they shall be so arranged that it is

===== Page 0266 =====
possible to travel in either direction from any point in a mall of a covered mall building to separate exits or from any point in an open mall of an open mall building to two separate locations on the perimeter line, provided that neither location is an exterior wall of an anchor building or parking garage. The width of an exit passageway or corridor from a mall shall be not less than 1.7 m.

Exception: Access to exits is permitted by way of a dead-end mall that does not exceed a length equal to twice the width of the mall measured at the narrowest location within the dead-end portion of the mall.

In order to accommodate the many occupants anticipated in a covered or open mall building, exits are to be distributed equally throughout the mall. If exits were congregated in certain areas, egress would be compounded by the convergence of a large number of people to one or more areas of the building. In an open mall building, the distribution of exits must occur at separate locations on the perimeter line that are open and provide continued egress to the public way. The corridors and exit access passageways from a mall must be at least 1.7 m wide. A typical covered mall design provides a number of large, multiple-door entrances distributed about the exterior wall of the building. This leads people into the main mall either directly or down a short tributary mall. These major entrances usually also serve as exits. Where the distance between these major entrance/exit points exceeds 120 m, Section 402.8.5 dictates another exit. Rather than change the design to add another major entrance/exit, a smaller exit passageway—at least 1.7 m in width—can be included. These typically run between two tenant spaces and have the appearance of a "back hallway" or corridor.

The maximum dead end permitted in a mall is twice the width of the mall. For a mall with a minimum width of 6 m, dead ends are permitted to be 12 m or less in length. The allowance for dead ends is in recognition of the reduced hazard represented by a dead end in a mall and because the relatively large minimum width provides alternative paths of travel. Additionally, dead ends are not as critical in a mall, since the volume of the space and the automatic sprinkler system minimize the potential for the space to become untenable in a fire condition.

402.8.6.1 Exit passageways. Where exit passageways provide a secondary means of egress from a tenant space, the exit passageways shall be constructed in accordance with Section 1024.
Where exit passageways must be provided because of either travel distance limitations in the mall or the number of means of egress required from a tenant space, the passageways must be enclosed as required by Section 1024. Doors into exit passageways must be self-closing or automatic-closing by smoke detection to provide the necessary protection for the occupants.

402.8.7 Service areas fronting on exit passageways. Mechanical rooms, electrical rooms, building service areas and service elevators are permitted to open directly into exit passageways, provided that the exit passageway is separated from such rooms with not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. The fire protection rating of openings in the fire barriers shall be not less than 1 hour.

In a covered mall building, it is necessary to provide for services to the tenant spaces that are maintained by the mall management (e.g., water, electricity, telephone and fire protection). These services must be located in a common space controlled by the mall management and, therefore, cannot be located within the tenant spaces. Frequently, these services are logically located with direct access to exit passageways at the rear of the tenant spaces. For open mall buildings, the use of exit passageways will probably not occur as frequently, but where they do, they also need to comply with this section.

Exit passageways are generally treated similarly to exit stairways in that only openings from normally occupied spaces are permitted. In other buildings this would prohibit doors or utility penetrations to such mechanical/electrical rooms. In the case of malls, the code allows an exception to that general rule, provided that the fire-resistance rating of the exit enclosure is maintained by appropriate opening protection, such as fire doors, fire dampers and through-penetration firestopping.

402.8.8 Security grilles and doors. Horizontal sliding or vertical security grilles or doors that are a part of a required means of egress shall conform to the following:

1 Doors and grilles shall remain in the full open position during the period of occupancy by the general public.

2 Doors or grilles shall not be brought to the closed position when there are 10 or more persons occupying spaces served by a single exit or 50 or more persons occupying spaces served by more than one exit.

===== Page 0267 =====
3 The doors or grilles shall be openable from within without the use of any special knowledge or effort where the space is occupied.

4 Where two or more exits are required, not more than one-half of the exits shall be permitted to include either a horizontal sliding or vertical rolling grille or door.

Where improperly installed or where their use is not properly supervised, security grilles and doors can prohibit or delay egress beyond an acceptable time period. Such security devices are common in covered mall buildings. In every case, the grille must be openable to permit egress from the inside without the use of tools, keys or special knowledge or effort where the grille spans across a means of egress. For example, during business hours in a mercantile use, the grille must remain in its full, open position. The grille may be taken to a partially closed position where it provides the sole means of egress and no more than nine persons occupy the space. Where a second means of egress is required, the grille may not be closed as long as more than 49 persons occupy the space.

Because security grilles represent such a threat to prompt egress, the number of occupants exposed to the risk of a lack of supervision of the devices is limited. Except where a single means of egress is permitted, alternative means of egress must be available and not equipped with such devices. Security grilles must not be used on more than 50 percent of the exits.

## SECTION 403 HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS

403.1 Applicability. High-rise buildings shall comply with Sections 403.2 through 403.6.

Exception: The provisions of Sections 403.2 through 403.6 shall not apply to the following buildings and structures:

1. Airport traffic control towers in accordance with Section 412.2.

2. Open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5.

3. The portion of a building containing a Group A-5 occupancy in accordance with Section 303.6.

4. Special industrial occupancies in accordance with Section 503.1.1.

5. Buildings containing any one of the following:

5.1. A Group H-1 occupancy.

5.2. A Group H-2 occupancy in accordance with Section 415.8, 415.9.2, 415.9.3 or 426.1.

## 5.3. A Group H-3 occupancy in accordance with Section 415.8.

“High-rise buildings” are defined in Chapter 2 as buildings with occupied floors located more than 23 m above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access [see Commentary Figure 403.1(1)]. Such buildings require special consideration relative to fire protection and occupant safety because of difficulties associated with smoke movement (stack effect), egress time, access by fire department personnel and perceived vulnerability to terrorist attack. This section contains provisions for high-rise buildings to address these special considerations.

While most of the provisions in Section 403 apply to all high-rise buildings, additional elevator requirements apply to high-rise buildings in excess of 36 m. Further standards apply to high-rise buildings greater than 128 m. These “super high-rises” must comply with enclosure structural integrity requirements (see Section 403.2.3), increased bond strength for sprayed fire-resistant materials (see Section 403.2.4), additional sprinkler risers (see Section 403.3.1) and have an additional exit stairway (see Section 403.5.2). In addition, these taller high-rise buildings are not allowed to be designed with the reduced fire-resistance ratings permitted in Section 403.2.1.

The provisions of Section 403 apply to all high-rise buildings except those identified in the five exceptions.

Exception 1 addresses airport control towers and is based on the limited fuel load and the limited number of persons occupying the tower (see Section 412.2). Many provisions in Section 412.2 provide parallel protection in control towers where the towers are of a height similar to these high-rise provisions.

The intent of Exception 3 is to exempt places of outdoor assembly (Group A-5) stadiums, but not other significant facilities that might be attached to the stadium. Stadiums that reach a 23 m occupied floor level height are generally going to be large facilities at major universities or occupied by professional sports teams. Such stadiums will have accessory spaces such as concession stands. However, the trend for elaborate skyscapes and large, multilevel press boxes should be addressed by the high-rise building standards. Major attached facilities such as office towers and residential buildings are not exempted even though attached to a Group A-5 structure.

Stand-alone open parking garages are exempted by Exception 2 because of the free ventilation to the outside that exists in such structures.

===== Page 0268 =====
Low-hazard special industrial occupancies, which meet the criteria of Section 503.1.1, are exempt from the high-rise provisions.

Finally, Exception 5 addresses buildings with Group H-1, H-2 or H-3 occupancies. H-1 occupancies must be in detached buildings and are limited to single-story buildings (see Section 415.7 and Table 504.4). Where Groups H-2 and H-3 are required to be in detached buildings in accordance with Section 415.8, high-rise building standards do not apply. Detached buildings, by definition, are limited to a single story. Finally, H-2 occupancy buildings that are liquefied petroleum gas facilities, dry cleaning plants, grain processing facilities or facilities where combustible dusts are generated or stored are not subject to Section 403. Other H-2 and H-3 occupancies could be in a high-rise building and are subject to Section 403 requirements.

High-rise buildings must comply with all provisions of the code. Section 403 provides additional requirements for high-rise development.

Section 403.2 specifies additional construction requirements, as well as some requirement reductions, applicable to constructing a high-rise building.

Section 403.3 states the basic requirement for all high-rise buildings that an automatic sprinkler system be provided throughout the building. Specific standards unique to high-rise development are also provided.

Section 403.4 specifies the various emergency detection and response systems that are required in a high-rise building.

Section 403.5 provides additional means of egress system requirements for the occupants of a high-rise building.

Section 403.6 provides elevator-related requirements for these structures.

The provisions are applicable to all buildings where the highest occupied floor is more than 23 m above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access [see Commentary Figure 403.1(1)]. The lowest level of fire department vehicle access refers to the lowest ground level at which the fire department vehicle could be staged at the exterior of the building for carrying out fire-fighting operations. The definition of a "High-rise building" comes from the International Symposium on Fire Safety in High-Rise Buildings sponsored by the General Services Administration (GSA). The definition developed at the symposium is as follows:

“A high-rise building is one in which emergency evacuation is not practical and in which fire must be fought internally because of height.” The usual characteristics of such a building:

- Are beyond the reach of fire department equipment.

• Pose a potential for significant stack effect.

• Require unreasonable evacuation time.

The 23 m height threshold was determined from the effective reach of a 30 m aerial apparatus based on the assumptions that the building will be set back from the curb, that access might be restricted by such things as parked cars and that obstructions, such as utility lines, would be present. The applicability of this section, however, is not based on the availability of such apparatus within the community.

Stack effect is illustrated in Commentary Figure 403.1(2), while typical evacuation times for buildings are shown in Commentary Figure 403.1(3).

403.2 Construction. The construction of high-rise buildings shall comply with the provisions of Sections 403.2.1 through 403.2.3.

Section 403.2 includes subsections allowing the reduction of fire-resistance rating in some high-rise buildings, requiring minimum structural integrity for exit and elevator enclosures and setting bond strength for sprayed fire-resistant materials.

403.2.1 Reduction in fire-resistance rating. The fire-resistance rating reductions specified in Sections 403.2.1.1 and 403.2.1.2 shall be allowed in buildings that have sprinkler control valves equipped with supervisory initiating devices and water-flow initiating devices for each floor.

Since the overall reliability of the sprinkler system is greatly enhanced by the system design provisions specified in this section and Section 403.3, certain modifications to the structural requirements are allowed.

Sprinkler control valves with supervisory initiating devices and water-flow initiating devices must be provided for each floor to realize the reduction in fire-resistance rating. Annunciation by floor is intended to allow rapid identification of the fire location by the fire department. Sprinkler control valves on each floor are intended to permit servicing activated systems without impairing the water supply to large portions of the building. It is, therefore, necessary to equip the valves with supervisory initiating devices. NFPA 13 does not require annunciation per floor, since some systems may take on configurations that would not lend themselves to this type of zoning. In accordance with Section 102.4, the criteria for this section takes precedence over the

===== Page 0269 =====
permissive language of NFPA 13; therefore, in order to use the reductions allowed by this section, the sprinkler system must comply with these features. Without these sprinkler system enhancements, no reductions are permissible. The sprinkler system enhancements found in Section 403.3 are required regardless of whether a reduction in fire-resistance rating is included in the building design.

403.2.1.1 Type of construction. The following reductions in the minimum fire-resistance rating of the building elements in Table 601 shall be permitted as follows:

1 For buildings not greater than 128 m in building height, the fire-resistance rating of the building elements in Type IA construction shall be permitted to be reduced to the minimum fire-resistance ratings for the building elements in Type IB.

Exception: The required fire-resistance rating of columns supporting floors shall not be reduced.

2 In other than Group F-1, H-2, H-3, H-5, M and S-1 occupancies, the fire-resistance rating of the building elements in Type IB construction shall be permitted to be reduced to the fire-resistance ratings in Type IIA.

3 The building height and building area limitations of a building containing building elements with reduced fire-resistance ratings shall be permitted to be the same as the building without such reductions.

This section specifies the allowed reductions in fire-resistance rating of building elements specified in Table 601, without this being considered a reduction in the construction type. Item 1 allows high-rise buildings that must be of Type IA construction for building height and building area purposes to have building elements that comply with the fire-resistance rating of the Type IIB construction type as shown in Table 601. This reduction is not applicable to buildings with a height in excess of 128 m and does not apply to columns that are supporting floors in any building classified as a high-rise building.

Item 2 allows high-rise buildings that must be of Type IB construction for building height and area purposes to have elements that comply with the fire-resistance rating of Type IIA construction as shown in Table 601. This reduction is not allowed where the building contains Group F-1, H-2, H-3, H-5, M or S-1 occupancies. This reduction is not allowed for these moderate-hazard buildings because of their customary higher fuel loads.

Item 3 states that even though the fire-resistance ratings have been reduced to the equivalent of the next lower construction type, the construction type of the building is not considered reduced. A Type IB building with 1-hour fire-resistant protection of the structural frame is still a Type IB building.

In determining the minimum allowable type of construction for a high-rise building, Tables 504.3, 504.4 and 506.2 are applied in the usual fashion (see Sections 504 and 506). Item 3 reminds the code user that even though reductions are taken, the allowable area for the building is that of the "original" type of construction and is not reduced because building elements have reduced fire protection. Section 403.2.1.1 is applied once the minimum type of construction has been determined. For example, an eight-story high-rise office building is to be constructed and equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Sections 403.2.1 and 403.3. The minimum allowable construction type is Type IB. In accordance with Section 403.2.1.1, however, the required fire-resistance ratings for the structural elements would be determined using the column for Type IIA construction in Tables 601 and 602. It should be noted that Tables 504.3, 504.4 and 506.2 do not permit the use of unprotected noncombustible construction in a high-rise building.

403.2.1.2 Shaft enclosures. For buildings not greater than 128 m in building height, the required fire resistance rating of the fire barriers enclosing vertical shafts, other than interior exit stairway and elevator hoistway enclosures, is permitted to be reduced to 1 hour where automatic sprinklers are installed within the shafts at the top and at alternate floor levels.

As with previous sections, based on the effectiveness and reliability of a complete automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Sections 403.2.1 and 403.3, the fire-resistance rating of shaft enclosures may be reduced to 1 hour, provided the sprinklers are also installed within the shafts at the top and at alternate floor levels. This reduction is not applicable to shafts within buildings with a building height in excess of 128 m.

The reduced fire-resistance rating also does not apply to shafts which are either interior exit stairway enclosures or elevator hoist-ways (see also Section 403.2.3 for requirements applicable to these shafts.) The reduction does not apply to exit stairway and elevator shafts since they may continue to be used for egress or for fire-fighter access during a fire; therefore, the integrity of the shaft must be maintained. If, for some reason, the fire penetrates the 1-hour shaft, it will affect conditions on other floors; hence, the need to maintain the protection for

===== Page 0270 =====
interior exit stairway and elevator shafts at the 2-hour level.

403.2.2 Structural integrity of interior exit stairways and elevator hoistway enclosures. For high-rise buildings of Risk Category III or IV in accordance with Section 1604.5, and for all buildings that are more than 128 m in building height, enclosures for interior exit stairways and elevator hoistway enclosures shall comply with Sections 403.2.2.1 through 403.2.2.4.

This section specifies a minimum standard for the integrity of the walls of interior exit stairways and elevator hoistway enclosures. The requirement applies to all high-rise buildings with a building height in excess of 128 m. It also applies to any high-rise building, regardless of height, that is either a Risk Category Class III or IV as specified in Section 1604.5. Risk Category Class IV are those uses that are considered to be essential in that their continuous use is needed, particularly in response to disasters. Risk Category Class III buildings include those occupancies that have relatively large numbers of occupants, where there is an elevated life safety hazard, or where the occupants' ability to respond to an emergency is limited. Also see the commentary to Sections 3007 and 3008.

403.2.2.1 Wall assembly materials—soft body impact. The panels making up the enclosures for interior exit stairways and elevator hoistway enclosures shall meet or exceed Soft Body Impact Classification Level 2 as measured by the test method described in ASTM C1629/C1629M when tested from the exterior side of the enclosure.

The requirement applies to all panels enclosing interior exit stairways, as well as elevator hoistway enclosures in the buildings specified in Section 403.2.3. The requirement applies regardless of the height or location of the particular enclosure. The standard applies to exit passageways that connect the enclosures of interior exit stairways to the exterior of the building, as well as those that connect an "offset" in an interior exit stairway. While this section of the code doesn't specifically include these exit passageways, Section 1024 requires that the level of protection in an exit be maintained until discharge.

The code relies on ASTM C1629 and C1629M for determining compliance with this requirement. The standard was developed specifically to test gypsum and fiber-reinforced cement panels; however, it can readily be used to test the impact resistance of other board and panel materials. For concrete and masonry walls, see Section 403.2.3.3. The code requires the entire wall assembly to withstand a Level 2 impact [which is 870 N of force] as measured using the ASTM C1629 Soft Body Impact Test. The test method used in ASTM C1629 is conducted in accordance with the ASTM E695 test method, which covers the measurement of the relative resistance of wall, floor and roof construction to impact loading.

403.2.2.2 Wall assembly materials—hard body impact. The panels making up the enclosures for interior exit stairways and elevator hoistway enclosures that are not exposed to the interior of the enclosure shall be in accordance with one of the following:

1 The wall assembly shall incorporate no fewer than two layers of impact-resistant panels, each of which meets or exceeds Hard Body Impact Classification Level 2 as measured by the test method described in ASTM C1629/C1629M.

2 The wall assembly shall incorporate no fewer than one layer of impact-resistant panels that meet or exceed Hard Body Impact Classification Level 3 as measured by the test method described in ASTM C1629/C1629M.

3 The wall assembly incorporates multiple layers of any material, tested in tandem, that meets or exceeds Hard Body Impact Classification Level 3 as measured by the test method described in ASTM C1629/C1629M.

Section 403.2.3.2 requires that the face of the panel that is not exposed to the shaft enclosure containing the interior exit stairway or elevators (or exit passageway)—the outside face—be protected by a material or materials that comply with a level of impact resistance. To comply with the requirement, at least two layers of Level 2 material or one layer of Level 3 material must be incorporated into the system. Level 2 material must withstand a Hard Body impact of 445 N to comply with the standard. Level 3 material must withstand a Hard Body impact of 670 N. The code also permits the use of a system composed of multiple layers of different materials, provided the composite system can comply with a Level 3 Hard Body test.

403.2.2.3 Concrete and masonry walls. Concrete or masonry walls shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of Sections 403.2.2.1 and 403.2.2.2.

Concrete and masonry walls used for such enclosures are deemed to be adequate to meet the intent of this requirement without any testing under ASTM C1629.

403.2.2.4 Other wall materials. Any other wall materials that provide impact resistance equivalent to that required by Sections 403.2.2.1 for Soft Body Impact Classification Level 2 and 403.2.2.2 for Hard Body Impact Classification

===== Page 0271 =====
Level 3, as measured by the test method described in ASTM C1629/C1629M, shall be permitted.

This section allows other materials to be tested and approved for application in these walls. Where a designer wished to include materials or a combination of materials not specified in Section 403.2.3.2 or 403.2.3.3, and wished to have the materials tested, it would be acceptable as a wall for these enclosures where it complies with the Level 3 Hard Body test.

403.2.3 Sprayed fire-resistant materials (SFRM). The bond strength of the SFRM installed throughout the building shall be in accordance with Table 403.2.4.

For buildings other than high-rise buildings, the minimum bond strength required for sprayed fire-resistant materials (SFRM) required by the code is 7.2 kN/m² when tested in accordance with ASTM E736. Recommendation 6 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) report on the World Trade Center (WTC) disaster called for improvement of the in-place performance of SFRM. For high-rise buildings with a building height in the 23 m to 128 m range, SFRM must have a minimum bond strength of 21 kN/m² wherever applied in the building. For high-rise buildings over 128 m, the bond strength must be at least 48 kN/m² wherever SFRM is applied in the building. While the NIST report was based on the specific events of the WTC fire and collapse, events far less dramatic can dislodge SFRM, such as elevator movement, building sway or maintenance activities. Using greater bond strengths will increase the probability that the protection will stay in place. These factors should provide for a longer time of safety.

See the commentary to Section 403.2.3.

403.3 Automatic sprinkler system. Buildings and structures shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and a secondary water supply where required by Section 403.3.3.

Exception: An automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in spaces or areas of telecommunications equipment buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided that those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 and are separated from the remainder of the building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or not less than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Because of the difficulties associated with manual suppression of a fire in a high-rise building, all high-rise buildings regulated by this section are required to be protected throughout with an automatic sprinkler system. The sprinkler system is to be in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, which requires compliance with NFPA 13.

In order to increase the reliability of the sprinkler system should an earthquake disable the primary water supply; a secondary water supply is required for buildings at sites with the specified seismic design category listed in Section 403.3.3. The secondary water supply must be equal to the hydraulically calculated sprinkler demand and must have a duration of not less than 30 minutes.

The exception addresses where a telecommunications equipment facility is part of a high-rise building. The automatic sprinkler protection can be eliminated from certain areas where an automatic sprinkler fire detection system is provided and the telecommunications equipment areas are separated from other building areas with fire-resistance-rated construction of the specified ratings. This same exception is provided in Section 903.2 but is restated here to emphasize its application to all buildings, including high-rise buildings. This exception is based on the need to maintain uninterrupted operation of telecommunications equipment, which frequently includes emergency telephone and similar communication services. The presence of an automatic sprinkler system or other automatic fire suppression system may be detrimental to public safety should disruption of emergency services occur.

403.3.1 Number of sprinkler risers and system design. Each sprinkler system zone in buildings that are more than 128 m in building height shall be supplied by not fewer than two risers. Each riser shall supply sprinklers on alternate floors. If more than two risers are provided for a zone, sprinklers on adjacent floors shall not be supplied from the same riser.

For all high-rise buildings with a building height in excess of 128 m, this section requires the sprinkler system to be designed with additional risers for each sprinkler zone. This redundancy provides increased reliability of the automatic sprinkler system. At least two risers must be provided for each sprinkler zone. Recommendation 12 of the NIST WTC report called for the redundancy of active fire suppression systems to be increased to

===== Page 0272 =====
accommodate the greater risks associated with increasing building height and population. Providing two risers in each zone allows for one riser to be taken out of service. The other will be able to supply sprinklers on the floors above and below. This will impede any fire spread and allow the fire department time to respond and extinguish the fire.

403.3.1.1 Riser location. Sprinkler risers shall be placed in interior exit stairways and ramps that are remotely located in accordance with Section 1007.1.

This section requires sprinkler risers to be located in the interior exit stairways of buildings. Such interior exit stairways must be separated in accordance with the requirements of Section 1007.1. This separation reduces the possibility that one incident could incapacitate both risers and additionally provides the protection of the rated enclosures. While the section references the separation requirements of Chapter 10, Section 403.5.1 can result in an even greater separation of the exit enclosures in these taller high-rise buildings. Also, Section 403.2.2 regarding the integrity of the interior exit stairways is intended to make sure that the walls of the enclosures protecting the risers meet a minimum impact standard. This increased integrity is required both for buildings taller than 126 m and high-rise buildings in Risk Category III or IV.

403.3.2 Water supply to required fire pumps. In all buildings that are more than 128 m in building height and buildings of Type IV-A and IV-B construction that are more than 36 m in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to not fewer than two water mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate.

Exception: Two connections to the same main shall be permitted provided that the main is valued such that an interruption can be isolated so that the water supply will continue without interruption through not fewer than one of the connections.

Fire pumps are installed in sprinkler and standpipe systems to pressurize the water supply for the minimum required sprinkler and standpipe operations. Fire pumps are only "required" to meet the system needs. Therefore, whether a particular high-rise building includes fire pumps will depend on interaction of the height of the building, the local water system and the designs of the sprinkler and standpipe systems in the building (see Section 913 of SBC 801 for more information on fire pumps).

Additional redundancy is required for buildings of extreme heights that can no longer be supported from the ground and also certain tall wood buildings reaching critical heights. This requirement applies at a lower height for Type IV-A and IV-B construction than for other types of construction. This relates to the potential contribution of the mass timber to the fuel load and limitations of the fire service apparatus to apply water at elevated floors.

Therefore, the requirements are applicable to buildings more than 128 m in height or Type IVA and IVB buildings more than 36 m in height, this section requires the fire pumps to be supplied by two water mains located in separate streets. Having two connections will greatly reduce the possibility of the loss of water due to a main break, given the valving of a public water system. Each connection must be adequate to provide the flow and pressure needed for the fire pumps to operate. The exception is a performance-based provision that is not tied to any specific configuration.

403.3.3 Secondary water supply. An automatic secondary on-site water supply having a capacity not less than the hydraulically calculated sprinkler demand, including the hose stream requirement, shall be provided for high-rise buildings assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F as determined by Section 1613. An additional fire pump shall not be required for the secondary water supply unless needed to provide the minimum design intake pressure at the suction side of the fire pump supplying the automatic sprinkler system. The secondary water supply shall have a duration of not less than 30 minutes as determined by the occupancy hazard classification in accordance with NFPA 13.

The intent of this section is that a secondary water supply be provided on the high-rise building site in order to provide a high level of functional reliability for the fire protection systems should a seismic event disable the primary water supply for high-rise buildings assigned these seismic design categories. The categories are described in Section 1613.

The text's specific wording that the secondary supply be on-site rather than adjacent to the site would preclude the use, for example, of a secondary connection to the municipal supply to achieve compliance with this requirement.

The required amount of water is equal to the hydraulically calculated sprinkler demand plus hose stream demand in accordance with NFPA 13 for a minimum 30-minute period. The

===== Page 0273 =====
necessary water demand will depend on the appropriate occupancy hazard classification in NFPA 13.

Note that the beginning of Section 403.3.3 requires that the secondary water supply be automatic; in other words, switchover to the secondary water source cannot occur manually. This is consistent with the definitions of "Automatic sprinkler system" and "Classes of standpipe systems" in that both systems are required to be connected to a reliable water supply.

Generally, this section does not automatically require a second fire pump but, where necessary, an additional pump may be required. A second pump would be necessary where the secondary water supply does not provide the necessary water pressure for intake into the primary fire pump.

403.3.4 Fire pump room. Fire pumps shall be located in rooms protected in accordance with Section 913.2.1.

Where fire pumps are provided, they must be properly isolated from other portions of the high-rise building with fire-resistance-rated construction in accordance with Section 913.2.1. The separation must consist of minimum 2-hour fire barriers or horizontal assemblies, or both. Such separation is not required where the fire pumps are physically separated from the building in accordance with NFPA 20.

403.4 Emergency systems. The detection, alarm and emergency systems of high-rise buildings shall comply with Sections 403.4.1 through 403.4.8.

Section 403.4 lists the requirements for detection and emergency response systems applicable to high-rise buildings. These systems detect smoke and heat in these buildings and provide systems to notify occupants of the hazards of, and proper response to, the fire or other event. Systems and facilities are provided for emergency responders to assist the occupants and fight a fire. Finally, this section provides requirements for standby and emergency power to keep vital systems operating in case of power loss, either during an event or power loss to the building.

403.4.1 Smoke detection. Smoke detection shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.13.1.

Automatic smoke detectors are required in all high-rise buildings in locations so that a fire will be detected in its early stages of development. Smoke detectors must be installed in rooms that are not typically occupied, such as mechanical equipment rooms, elevator equipment rooms and similar spaces. Smoke detectors are also required in elevator lobbies. Finally, smoke detectors are required at various locations in the HVAC ducts. See Section 907.2.13 for the specific requirements for high-rise buildings.

403.4.2 Fire alarm system. A fire alarm system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.13.

Fire alarm systems must be provided in high-rise buildings in accordance with the provisions of Section 907.2.13. Although a fire alarm system is not specifically listed as a requirement in Section 907.2.13, this section does require an automatic smoke detection system. Section 907.2.13.1.1 requires that the smoke detectors be connected to an automatic fire alarm system. Therefore, regardless of the occupancy classification or classifications in the high-rise building, a fire alarm system must comply with the code and NFPA 72, as applicable.

403.4.3 Standpipe system. A high-rise building shall be equipped with a standpipe system as required by Section 905.3.

Section 905.3 provides the applicable provisions for standpipes in buildings, including high-rise buildings. At a minimum, a Class I standpipe system is required based on Exception 1 to Section 905.3.1.

403.4.4 Emergency voice/alarm communication system. An emergency voice/alarm communication system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

By definition, one characteristic of high-rise buildings is longer evacuation times. As such, the traditional fire alarm system, which usually results in simultaneous total building evacuation, is not practical. Therefore, the alarm communication system should be able to:

Direct the occupants of the fire zone to an area of refuge or exit.

• Notify the fire department of the existence of the fire.

• Sound no alarms outside the fire zone until deemed desirable.

The alarm signal to the fire zone may include continuous sounding devices (e.g., bells, horns, chimes), as well as voice direction, which may momentarily silence the continuous sounding devices so as to be heard clearly. In accordance with Section 907.5.2.3, visible alarm notification appliances are required in the common and public areas of the high-rise buildings. Visible alarm appliances are also required in certain dwelling units and sleeping units, such as hotel guest rooms. The message of the voice/alarm is to be predetermined but does not need to be a recorded message. It would typically indicate that a fire has been

===== Page 0274 =====
reported at a specific location and that occupants should await further instructions or evacuate in accordance with the building's fire safety and evacuation plan. The voice/alarm signal will usually commence with a 3-to 10-second alert signal followed by the message. See the commentary to Section 907.5.2.2 for further requirements of the emergency voice/alarm communication system. Such systems can also be used for incidents other than fire.

403.4.5 Emergency communication coverage. In-building, two-way emergency responder communication coverage shall be provided in accordance with Section 510 of SBC 801.

High-rise buildings have posed a challenge to the traditional communication systems used by the fire service for fire-to-ground communications. Therefore, inbuilding, two-way emergency responder communication coverage complying with Section 510 of SBC 801 must be provided. The coverage is needed to coordinate with the fire department radio system to allow fire-ground officers to remain in communication with fire fighters working in various areas of a building.

As facilities grow larger and more complex, they become more challenging for effective fire response. Other complications include the use of low-emission glass, which tends to block the ability of signals from outside the building. Therefore, more features must be provided within the building to enable adequate communication from within the building. While modeling and other techniques may provide a good prediction as to whether a building will interfere with the emergency responder communication systems, the reality is that it is unknown if a building will need to have an enhanced communication coverage system installed until after the building is constructed. The presumption is that high-rise buildings will more likely than not need to be provided with additional coverage to facilitate fire service and other emergency responder communications. Note that another term used to describe in-building, two-way communication coverage systems is “emergency responder communications enhancement systems” (ERCES). Section 510.1 of SBC 801 offers three exceptions that may be considered by the building and fire code officials.

403.4.6 Fire command. A fire command center complying with Section 911 shall be provided in a location approved by the fire code official.

Fireground operations usually involve establishing an incident command post where the fire official can observe what is happening, control arriving personnel and equipment, and direct resources and fire-fighting operations effectively. Because of the difficulties in controlling a fire in a high-rise building, a separate room (enclosed in 1-hour-rated construction) within the building must be established as a fire command center. The room must be provided at a location that is acceptable to the fire code official, often the Fire Chief. Such centers are typically located near the front of the building or near the main entrance. The room must contain equipment necessary to monitor or control fire protection and other building service systems (see Section 911 for further information).

403.4.7 Smoke removal. To facilitate smoke removal in post-fire salvage and overhaul operations, buildings and structures shall be equipped with natural or mechanical ventilation for removal of products of combustion in accordance with one of the following:

1 Easily identifiable, manually operable windows or panels shall be distributed around the perimeter of each floor at not more than 15 m intervals. The area of operable windows or panels shall be not less than 4 m \( ^{2} \)  per 15 m of perimeter.

Exceptions:

1. In Group R-1 occupancies, each sleeping unit or suite having an exterior wall shall be permitted to be provided with 0.2 m² of venting area in lieu of the area specified in Item 1.

2. Windows shall be permitted to be fixed provided that glazing can be cleared by fire fighters.

2 Mechanical air-handling equipment providing one exhaust air change every 15 minutes for the area involved. Return and exhaust air shall be moved directly to the outside without recirculation to other portions of the building.

3 Any other approved design that will produce equivalent results.

Section 403.4.7 requires new high-rise buildings to be provided with a smoke removal system to exhaust products of combustion following a fire incident. The intent of the requirement as clearly specified in the code is to facilitate the removal of smoke during the salvage and overhaul of a building after a fire has ended. "Overhaul and salvage operations" are generally understood to include searching the fire scene to detect and extinguish hidden fires or "hot spots." They also include controlling additional losses, stabilizing the incident scene by providing for fire-fighter safety and securing the structure. The smoke

===== Page 0275 =====
removal system is not a smoke control system as required for atrium or underground buildings. The smoke removal system in a high-rise building is not intended for use during a fire event. It is not intended to serve any health and life safety functions, and, therefore, is only required to operate after, and not during, a fire event. In comparison, a smoke control system for an atrium is a life safety function and is designed to operate during a fire event to control smoke that is generated by the fire and keep it from migrating to other portions of the structure. This is not a smoke control system required elsewhere in the code; therefore, Section 909 is not referenced and is not applicable.

A smoke removal system can be a whole building system or a floor-by-floor localized system. It can also be provided by either natural means or a mechanical system. Where a mechanical ventilation system is utilized, the controls for the smoke removal system are allowed to be independent of the building's HVAC system, or it may be an integral part of that or other ventilation systems present in the building. The technical requirements for smoke removal design for high-rise buildings are included in Section 403.4.7. Two primary options for accomplishing post-fire smoke removal are provided.

In Item 1, the option is a natural ventilation system. This design option relies on reasonably spaced and sized openings to allow air movement through a story. This is accomplished by providing operable windows or panels of a minimum size and spacing around the exterior of each story.

There are two exceptions to this design option. Exception 1 applies to Group R-1 occupancy hotels. It permits each guestroom or suite to have a single 0.19 m² operable window or panel in lieu of the 3.7 m². Exception 2 allows fixed windows to be used in lieu of operable windows or panels, provided the glazing can be cleared by fire fighters. Traditional tempered glass may be an appropriate type of glazing for this exception provided it is not coated or has an applied film that modifies its natural breaking characteristics. Designers should work with the building official and the fire department to determine what type of glazing might meet the intent of this exception.

In Item 2, option is a mechanical ventilation system. This design option requires a mechanical air-handling system capable of exhausting the equivalent of one air change every 15 minutes. The code requires both the air being exhausted from the building and any return air that might be coming from the fire salvage areas to be exhausted outside of the building. Where using the mechanical ventilation option, the design will most likely result in the use of dampers to zone floors and to introduce fresh air.

Since the smoke removal system is meant to be used after a fire for cleanup and recovery and not during a fire event, it is not necessary to connect this system to standby or emergency power.

In Item 3, the design option simply states that any system that can provide results similar to the prescribed natural or mechanical systems in Item 1 or 2 can be used where such alternative has been approved by the building official. This provision restates the general code allowance for alternative methods permitted by Section 104.11.
403.4.8 Standby and emergency power. A standby power system complying with Section 2702 and Section 3003 shall be provided for the standby power loads specified in Section 403.4.8.3. An emergency power system complying with Section 2702 shall be provided for the emergency power loads specified in Section 403.4.8.4.

An emergency power system complying with Section 2702 shall be provided for the emergency power loads specified in Section 403.4.8.4.

Standby and emergency power are required to increase the probability that the fire protection systems and elevators will continue to function in the event of failure of normal building service. By referencing Chapter 27, these provisions pick up the requirements of not only the NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401), but also NFPA 110 and 111. Section 403.4.8.3 lists three systems that are considered standby power loads and must be supplied with standby power. Section 403.4.8.4 lists six systems that must be supplied with emergency power.

403.4.8.1 Equipment room. If the standby or emergency power system includes a generator set inside a building, the system shall be located in a separate room enclosed with 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. System supervision with manual start and transfer features shall be provided at the fire command center.

Exception: In Group I-2, Condition 2, manual start and transfer features for the critical branch of the emergency power are not required to be provided at the fire command center.

The section requires that, where generators are used to provide standby power, emergency power, or both, such generators be protected in a room of not less than 2-hour construction. The walls of the room are to be constructed as fire barriers. Since Section 2702.1.5 requires these systems to be supplied with power for 2 hours, for high-rise buildings it was thought to

===== Page 0276 =====
be essential that the generator be protected for that length of time. The purpose of the enclosure is to decrease the probability that a fire can affect both the normal and standby power systems. It is important to note that this requirement is more restrictive than the provisions found in the NEC (NFPA 70). NFPA 70 would only require either the 2-hour fire protection or a sprinkler system, but not both. Because high-rise buildings are required to be sprinkler protected, these standby systems end up with both the sprinkler protection and the separation.

The controls of the systems are to be located in the building's fire command center. The exception allows hospitals to place the controls for critical branch emergency power in a location more appropriate for the hospital's chief engineer or other authorized person to control.

403.4.8.2 Fuel line piping protection. Fuel lines supplying a generator set inside a building shall be separated from areas of the building other than the room the generator is located in by one of the following methods:

1 A fire-resistant pipe-protection system that has been tested in accordance with UL 1489. The system shall be installed as tested and in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and shall have a rating of not less than 2 hours. Where the building is protected throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the required rating shall be reduced to 1 hour.

2 An assembly that has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. Where the building is protected throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, the required fire-resistance rating shall be reduced to 1 hour.

3 Other approved methods.

This section adds to the protection of standby and emergency power systems. Section 403.4.8.1 requires that an on-site generator set be in an enclosure with not less than 2 hours of protection. Where the generators are fuel dependent, the fuel lines delivering the fuel must also be protected. This section offers several options, including the use of an UL 1489 fire resistance piping system. This provides the fire resistance to the pipe itself versus being located within the building construction. Generally, this section is intended to provide 2-hour protection in a building without automatic sprinkler protection complying with NFPA 13. Where an NFPA 13 system is provided, the fire resistance can be reduced to 1-hour. Automatic sprinklers are required in a high-rise building; therefore, a 1-hour fire-resistance rating would be acceptable. The third option provided is essentially the allowance of an alternative method.

403.4.8.3 Standby power loads. The following are classified as standby power loads:

1 Ventilation and automatic fire detection equipment for smoke proof enclosures.

2 Elevators.

3 Where elevators are provided in a high-rise building for accessible means of egress, fire service access or occupant self-evacuation, the standby power system shall also comply with Sections 1009.4, 3007 or 3008, as applicable.

The standby power system must be adequate to provide power to smokeproof enclosures (Section 403.5.4) and elevators. Item 3 is not a distinct requirement as Item 2 already requires standby power to all elevators. Item 3 simply refers the code user to other sections where additional elevator requirements are imposed. Elevators in a high-rise building must be provided with standby power. Additional requirements are found in Section 1009.4 for elevators used as accessible means of egress; Section 3007 for fire service access elevators required by Section 403.6.1; and Section 3008 for occupant evacuation elevators provided under Section 403.6.2. These additional provisions may add to the standby power load. Where standby power is required for elevators, Section 3003 describes how it is to be provided. Under Section 3003, an arrangement must be made such that any elevator may be connected to the standby power with one elevator designated as the primary recipient of power once the standby system is activated. The primary elevator must be capable of serving all floors of a building. In extremely tall buildings, it may be necessary to designate multiple elevators as being primary recipients in order to permit usage of both local and express elevators. The capacity of the standby system must be such that all equipment that has to be operational at the same time will be able to function. The system need not, however, be capable of supplying the load for all connected equipment simultaneously where automatic load shedding is provided. For example, where multiple elevators are connected to the system, the standby power system need only be capable of supplying one elevator such that the elevator provides access to all floors and that central controls restrict operation of other elevators at the same time.

===== Page 0277 =====
The intent of the provisions of Section 3003 is not only to keep one elevator in operation, but also to make sure that all elevators at least initially make it to the designated level and allow passengers to exit the elevators (see commentary, Section 3003).

Note that the requirements for elevators designated as fire service access elevators or elevators used for occupant evacuation have different and generally more restrictive requirements for standby power (see commentary, Sections 3007.8 and 3008.8).

403.4.8.4 Emergency power loads. The following are classified as emergency power loads:

1 Exit signs and means of egress illumination required by Chapter 10.

2 Elevator car lighting.

3 Emergency voice/alarm communications systems.

4 Automatic fire detection systems.

5 Fire alarm systems.

6 Electrically powered fire pumps.

7 Power and lighting for the fire command center required by Section 403.4.6.

This section simply specifies those systems that must be connected to the emergency power system. The illumination of exit signs and the means of egress are required by Sections 1008 and 1013. Other systems are required by the provisions of Section 403. These systems must be provided power within 10 seconds of loss of regular power.

403.5 Means of egress and evacuation. The means of egress in high-rise buildings shall comply with Sections 403.5.1 through 403.5.5.

Section 403.5 provides the requirements for means of egress systems applicable to high-rise buildings. Because of the size and height of high-rise buildings, they will contain large occupant loads that, when a building is evacuated, have longer evacuation times than low-rise buildings. Therefore, additional standards for egress systems are imposed for high-rise buildings. These include requiring greater separation of the exit stairways in all high-rise buildings and requiring most stairways to be smokeproof enclosures. For high-rise buildings in excess of 128 m, an extra stairway, in addition to those provided based on the occupant load, is required. Luminous egress path markings are required for both vertical and horizontal exit enclosures. Section 403.5.3 addresses the practice of locking doors of an interior exit stairway.

403.5.1 Remoteness of interior exit stairways. Required interior exit stairways shall be separated by a distance not less than 10 m or not less than one-fourth of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the building or area to be served, whichever is less. The distance shall be measured in a straight line between the nearest points of the enclosure surrounding the interior exit stairways. In buildings with three or more interior exit stairways, not fewer than two of the interior exit stairways shall comply with this section. Interlocking or scissor stairways shall be counted as one interior exit stairway.

This section requires that two of the interior exit stairways be separated from each other by a minimum distance. Requiring a minimum separation, even as little as 9 m, reduces the probability that a fire or other event that damages one interior exit stairway enclosure will also cause the second interior exit stairway to be unusable. This separation requirement must be met, as well as the separation standards of Section 1007.1.1. The separation is to be measured between the enclosures surrounding the interior exit stairways, where the design of a building under Section 1007 results in two interior exit stairways being separated by 9 m or more, then Section 403.5.1 is also satisfied. While Section 1007 requires that two means of egress be separated by at least one-half or one-third of the diagonal measurement of the area served, the distance is measured between the doors into those interior exit stairways. Depending on the size and configuration of the building, two interior exit stairways could directly adjoin each other and still comply with Section 1007. For high-rise buildings, Section 403.5.1 requires that the interior exit stairway enclosures be completely separated at all points by the distance prescribed (see Commentary Figure 403.5.1).

Section 403.5.1 applies to all high-rise buildings subject to Section 403, regardless of the height of the building above 23 m. The requirement is either 9 m, or one-fourth of the diagonal measurement of the area served, whichever is less. This is the same diagonal that is measured for compliance with Section 1007. For any building with a diagonal exceeding 36 m, the enclosures of interior exit stairways must be at least 9 m apart at their closest points. Only where the diagonal is less than 36 m will the one-fourth of the diagonal come into play. For example, a building with a 30 m maximum diagonal would only need 7.5 m between the two interior exit stairway enclosures. In larger buildings, with an occupant load per story in excess of 500, a third stairway is required. Also in buildings in excess of 128 m, an additional stairway is required. The separation required by Section 403.5.1 only applies to two of the interior exit

===== Page 0278 =====
stairways. Any required third or fourth stairway could be directly adjacent to one of the first two interior exit stairways.

Interlocking interior exit stairways (two interior exit stairways that “wrap” around each other as they descend through the building) or scissor stairways (two stairways in the same shaft enclosure) have to be considered as one interior exit stairway for the purposes of this section. Clearly a scissor stairway does not create two independent interior exit stairways, and therefore would not meet the needs of this requirement. Similarly, interlocking interior exit stairways often share a common enclosure wall with an interior exit stairway on each side. Obviously, two interior exit stairways sharing a common enclosure wall would not meet the minimum separation requirement.

403.5.2 Additional interior exit stairway. For buildings other than Group R-2 and their ancillary spaces that are more than 128 m in building height, one additional interior exit stairway meeting the requirements of Sections 1011 and 1023 shall be provided in addition to the minimum number of exits required by Section 1006.3. The total capacity of any combination of remaining interior exit stairways with one interior exit stairway removed shall be not less than the total capacity required by Section 1005.1. Scissor stairways shall not be considered the additional interior exit stairway required by this section.

Exceptions:

1. An additional interior exit stairway shall not be required to be installed in buildings having elevators used for occupant self-evacuation in accordance with Section 3008.

2. An additional interior exit stairway shall not be required for other portions of the building where the highest occupiable floor level in those areas is less than 128 m in building height.

For buildings in excess of 128 m in height, this provision requires an extra stairway to be provided in addition to the number of stairways (means of egress) required based on occupant load of the building as well as travel distance (see Sections 1004 and 1017). This requirement does not apply to high-rise buildings that are occupied as Group R-2 apartments or condominiums but would apply to R-1 hotels. Where a building is a mixed-occupancy structure, the building official should consider which occupancies are located above the 128 m level. The phrase "Group R-2 and their ancillary spaces" is intended to allow spaces used as amenity space, such as pools, fitness centers and clubhouses that serve the occupants of the residential units and are primarily used by the same occupants, to be considered under the umbrella of the R-2 exemption from this requirement.

The intent of this provision is to accommodate a simultaneous occurrence of evacuation of the occupants of a high-rise building and firefighting operations. The traditional approach to emergencies in a high-rise building is to allow people on a floor affected by a fire to move up or down in the building to another story that is relatively safe from the effects of the fire. Fire fighters will usually set up a staging point one or two stories below the fire and commandeer one of the stairways to move up to the fire floor. If for some reason it becomes necessary to evacuate the building during active fire fighting, the capacity of the means of egress system could be cut in half if only two stairways are provided. This section implements, in part, Recommendation 17 of the NIST report. The report states that buildings should be designed to accommodate timely full-building evacuation of occupants when required by building-specific or large-scale emergencies, such as widespread power outages, major earthquakes, tornadoes, hurricanes without sufficient advance warning, fires, explosions or terrorist attacks.

The code requires that the extra stairway be sized so that where there is a loss of the use of any one stairway, the remaining stairways will be of sufficient size (capacity) to accommodate the occupant load served by the stairways. For example, in a high-rise office building that has a calculated occupant load of 250 on each story, two stairways each designed to accommodate 125 occupants will be the minimum requirement in accordance with Chapter 10. The minimum stairway width of 1100 mm is sufficient to accommodate 146 people, or slightly more than needed for this building. In this building, a third interior exit stairway would therefore need to be provided that is also at least 1100 mm in width. The result is that if the fire fighters need to commandeer stairway 1, stairways 2 and 3, which each have a capacity to serve 146 people, will still be large enough to meet the occupant load requirements for the means of egress system. In larger buildings with occupant loads in excess of 500, a third stairway is required by Section 1006.2.1.1. In such buildings, Section 403.5.2 would require a fourth exit stairway.

The “additional” stairway has to comply with all the same requirements of any stairway in a high-rise building, including a design complying with smokeproof enclosures required by Section 403.5.4.

===== Page 0279 =====
The additional stairway is not affected by the remoteness requirement of Section 403.5.1. That section applies to the first two exit stairway enclosures required in a building. Additional stairways, whether required for occupant load, travel distance or this section, do not also need to comply with the remoteness requirement of Section 403.5.1.

Exception 1 permits the installation of occupant evacuation elevators as an alternative to providing the additional exit stairway (see also the commentary to Sections 403.6.2 and 3008). The intent behind the exception is recognition that the requirement for an additional stairway is based on the loss of egress capacity under the circumstance of simultaneous total building evacuation and firefighting. Recognizing that occupant evacuation elevators provide an alternative way to meet a portion of the evacuation needs in these circumstances, the code allows the elevators as a substitute for the additional capacity provided by a third or fourth stairway. Where occupant evacuation elevators are proposed, the requirements of Section 3008 apply to all passenger elevators for general public use in the building (see commentary, Section 3008).

Exception 2 clarifies the application of this section to large complex buildings. The intent of the exception is to restrict the application of the section to the part of a complex that is over 126 m. lex building that includes a tower over 126 m.

403.5.3 Stairway door operation. Stairway doors other than the exit discharge doors shall be permitted to be locked from the stairway side. Stairway doors that are locked from the stairway side shall be capable of being unlocked simultaneously without unlatching upon a signal from the fire command center.

Section 1010.1.9.12 requires that all egress doors for interior stairways be readily openable from both sides. Facility managers often desire to control movement of people within a building and to provide additional security from external threats. This section permits locking of stairway doors from the stair side where all doors are capable of being simultaneously unlocked. Since high-rise buildings are difficult to evacuate and people are often relocated to another floor level during an emergency, access from the stairway to a floor could be essential in a fire or other emergency. Therefore, all stairway doors that are to be locked from the stairway side must have the capability of being unlocked on a signal from the fire command center. The unlocking of the door must not negate the latching feature, which is essential to the operation of the door as a fire door. Section 403.4.8.4, Item 7, by its reference to Section 403.4.6, requires the locking feature to be connected to the emergency power system. When the door is unlocked during an emergency, it should not automatically relock on closure. Electrically powered locks should be designed such that when power to the locking device is interrupted, the lock is released. This is intended to enable doors to be operable from the inside of the stairway, and not locked, if power to the lock is interrupted. The building official should review the emergency release operation of stairway doors to determine that they remain unlocked.

403.5.3.1 Stairway communication system. A telephone or other two-way communications system connected to an approved constantly attended station shall be provided at not less than every fifth floor in each stairway where the doors to the stairway are locked.

where the stairway doors are locked to restrict reentry as permitted in Section 403.5.3, a two-way communication system must be provided at not less than every fifth floor and must be connected to the standby power system. This system is required to be connected to a constantly attended location, which could be within the building, or to a central station that monitors fire alarms and is manned 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Use of the fire command center is not recommended, since it may not be constantly attended. The system will permit occupants in the stairway to notify an attended location that the stairway doors need to be unlocked to access another floor or because conditions in the stairway prevent its continued use.

403.5.4 Smokeproof enclosures. Every required interior exit stairway serving floors more than 23 m above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access shall be a smokeproof enclosure in accordance with Sections 909.20 and 1023.12.

This section serves as a reminder that the smokeproof enclosure provisions of Section 1023.11 are applicable to high-rise buildings. Section 909.20 provides the standards on the construction of a smokeproof enclosure. It is important to understand that this requirement is only applicable in the portions of the building where the stack effect is more of a factor and the resulting spread of smoke will be the greatest. For example, where the high-rise building consists of a tower portion with a larger area on the bottom that is only a couple of stories in height, these requirements would only be applicable to stairways in the tower portion that serve floors that are more than 23

===== Page 0280 =====
m above the level where fire department vehicles would be located. The requirement would not apply to stairways in a low-rise portion of a building not exceeding 23 m, nor to stairways within the tower that do not serve floors more than 23 m above the lowest level of fire department access.

403.5.5 Luminous egress path markings. Luminous egress path markings shall be provided in accordance with Section 1025.

This section requires the provision of luminous egress path markings in all high-rise buildings containing any Group A, B, E, I, M or R-1 occupancy. The specific requirements are found in Section 1025. The requirements apply only to exit enclosures, vertical or horizontal. The markings are not required in the exit access or exit discharge portions of the means of egress system, nor at a horizontal exit.

403.6 Elevators. Elevator installation and operation in highrise buildings shall comply with Chapter 30 and Sections 403.6.1 and 403.6.2.

This section explicitly states that elevator installation and operation are to be in accordance with Chapter 30, which contains provisions for the design, construction, installation, operation and maintenance of elevators. While a vital purpose of the elevator requirements in high-rise buildings has always been for the use of the fire department, this role has been enhanced (see Section 403.6.1). Elevators have been one method of providing an accessible means of egress under the requirements of Section 1009, but have never been considered part of the means of egress system for the nondisabled occupants of a building or for those with disabilities to self-evacuate. However, elevators are now allowed to augment the egress system for all occupants in buildings over 128 m in height. The allowance for self-evacuation is based on occupants using the elevators prior to the elevators being recalled. This is much different from the requirements of Section 1009, under which fire department personnel use the elevators to assist in the rescue of occupants while those elevators are on Phase II emergency operation.

Chapter 30 provides important standards for the size of elevators, allowing ambulance stretchers to easily fit into at least one elevator serving high-rise buildings. Protection of the hoistway and machine room is also addressed.
403.6.1 Fire service access elevator. In buildings with an occupied floor more than 36 m above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, not fewer than two fire service access elevators, or all elevators, whichever is less, shall be provided in accordance with Section 3007. Each fire service access elevator shall have a capacity of not less than 1600 kg and shall comply with Section 3002.4.

For buildings with occupied floors in excess of 36 m above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, at least two of the elevators must comply with the fire service access elevator requirements, which are detailed in Section 3007 (see Commentary Figure 403.6.1). The requirements in Section 3007 are another result of NIST research following the World Trade Center fire and collapse. The fire service access provisions work with previously enacted emergency operation requirements for elevators, allowing elevators that comply with Section 3007 to remain in service for trained fire fighters to reach the upper levels of a building within a reasonable amount of time and to stage their fire-fighting operations at a level below the actual fire. These elevators must be provided with a lobby of a minimum size that is protected by at least 1-hour fire-resistance-rated smoke barriers. The lobby must be directly connected to one of the interior exit stairways and that stairway must contain a standpipe as required by Section 905. These lobbies may also serve as the area of refuge required as part of an accessible means of egress. People waiting for assistance in egress will need to be helped to a safe location before one lobby or another is used as the staging location for firefighting.

The need for at least two elevators complying with Section 3007 is based on past experience showing that on many occasions elevators are not available because of various reasons, including problems in operation, routine maintenance, modernization programs and EMS operations in the building prior to fire fighter arrival. A minimum of two fire service elevators provided with all of the benefits afforded by such elevators better ensures that there will be a fire service access elevator available for the fire fighters' use in the performance of their duties.

The requirement for a minimum capacity of 1600 kg for fire service access elevators allows for design flexibility in the selection of elevator cars while still providing the necessary capacity and size for emergency responder needs. Finally, Section 3002.4 is referenced to ensure that fire service access elevators will be large enough to accommodate an ambulance stretcher.

403.6.2 Occupant evacuation elevators. Where installed in accordance with Section 3008, passenger elevators for general public use shall be permitted to be used for occupant self-evacuation.

Section 3008 provides the requirements for occupant evacuation elevators. When part of a fire safety and evacuation plan, occupant

===== Page 0281 =====
evacuation elevators are allowed in a building. A key element of applying Section 3008 is that all passenger elevators for general public use in the building must comply. Similar to fire service access elevators, occupant evacuation elevators must be provided with a lobby constructed of 1-hour fire-resistance-rated smoke barriers. Occupant evacuation elevators also require signs and other indicators, as well as a communication system connected to the fire command center to help occupants use the elevators. Where occupant evacuation elevators are provided, their requirements make for a substantially improved accessible means of egress over the requirements of Section 1009, which only allow for fire-fighter-assisted evacuation.

For any high-rise building, elevators may be designed for occupant self-evacuation. In fact, Section 3008 could be applied to any building as long as the design complies with all of the requirements. Elevators are still prohibited by Section 1003.7 from serving as a means of egress for the general population of a building. However, in high-rise buildings in excess of 128 m in height, Section 403.5.2 requires there be an exit stairway provided in addition to those needed for egress capacity or travel distance purposes. This additional stairway is not required where the elevators in the building comply with Section 3008 and allow occupant self-evacuation.

## SECTION 404 ATRIUMS

404.1 General. The provisions of Sections 404.1 through 404.11 shall apply to buildings containing atriums. Atriums are not permitted in buildings or structures classified as Group H.

Exception: Vertical openings that comply with Sections 712.1.1 through 712.1.3, and Sections 712.1.9 through 712.1.14.

Unprotected vertical openings are often identified as the factors responsible for fire spread in incidents involving fire fatalities or extensive property damage. Section 404 addresses one method for protection of these specific building features in lieu of providing a complete horizontal (floor) separation. Atriums are considered acceptable where in compliance with the criteria of this section. The atrium provisions in this section are among several general and occupancy specific options for addressing vertical openings as set forth in Section 712 and referenced in the exception. For example, Section 712 permits openings within residential dwelling units to be unprotected. Other unprotected vertical openings that are permitted by the code include covered malls (see Section 402), communicating spaces in buildings of Group I-3 (see Section 408.5), mezzanines (see Section 505), escalator or supplemental stairway openings (see Section 712.1.3), open parking garages (see Section 406.5), enclosed parking garages (see Section 406.6), and as otherwise noted in Section 712.

An atrium is a space within a building that extends vertically and connects two or more stories. Atriums are not to be considered unprotected vertical openings; rather, the vertical openings are protected by means other than enclosure of the shaft or a complete floor assembly. This section does not apply to spaces that comply with Section 712 based on the itemized options, other than Section 712.1.7. In other words, where compliance with Section 712 is achieved by applying one of the options other than Section 712.1.7 that permits an atrium, then compliance with Section 404 is not required. Likewise, where the provisions of Section 404 have been complied with, then the other options listed in Section 712 do not need to be addressed. Spaces that are separated from the atrium by shaft enclosure assembles complying with the provisions of Section 713 are not considered as part of the atrium. Section 404 applies only to the spaces that are contained within the atrium. Atriums are permitted in all buildings except Group H.

There are many options provided in Section 712 for treating openings between stories. Atriums are just one option. Some of the other options also allow for connecting atmospheres between stories. For example, Section 712.1.9 allows two stories to be open to each other. The use of Section 712.1.9 will require a rated separation from an atrium that connects additional stories (Item 6 of Section 712.1.9). In summary, the use of other 712 options needs to be carefully coordinated with each other and with the atrium option.

404.2 Use. The floor of the atrium shall not be used for other than low fire hazard uses and only approved materials and decorations in accordance with SBC 801 shall be used in the atrium space.

Exception: The atrium floor area is permitted to be used for any approved use where the individual space is provided with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

Because an automatic sprinkler system at the ceiling of an atrium may not be effective for a fire on the floor of the atrium due to the ceiling height or obstructions to the sprinkler discharge, the use and activities of the floor level and the types of materials in the atrium space must be controlled. This section applies to all atriums, regardless of their height or area. Low fire-hazard uses would limit the atrium.

===== Page 0282 =====
floor to such functions as pedestrian walk-through areas, security desks and reception areas. Storage areas, fabrication areas and office areas would not be low fire-hazard uses. Chapter 8 regulates the use of decorative materials and furnishings.

Where the floor area is equipped with an automatic sprinkler system that can provide the required protection, then the use of the atrium floor is not restricted. The exception stipulates that such areas must be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system as is required throughout the remainder of the atrium. An example found in many hotel atrium is the restaurant. If the actual kitchen is in the atrium, certainly it is not low hazard and therefore would be sprinkled. The dining area may need to be sprinkled if the officials conclude that it is not low hazard.

404.3 Automatic sprinkler protection. An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the entire building.

Exceptions:

1. That area of a building adjacent to or above the atrium need not be sprinkled provided that portion of the building is separated from the atrium portion by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

2. Where the ceiling of the atrium is more than 16 m above the floor, sprinkler protection at the ceiling of the atrium is not required.

One means of controlling the spread of fire and smoke through vertical openings is to control and extinguish the fire as early as possible. Therefore, all floor areas that are connected by the atrium are to be protected with an approved sprinkler system, including the atrium space itself. The system is to be designed, installed, tested and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 903.3 and SBC 801. Since Chapter 9 requires that the sprinkler system be supervised, the reliability of the sprinkler system is improved.

Exception 1 clarifies that since the atrium protection is one of the various options for protecting vertical openings, typically an alternative to a shaft enclosure, the sprinkler system is not required in areas that are separated from the atrium by 2-hour fire barrier walls or horizontal assemblies that would otherwise be required for a shaft enclosure. Such fire barrier walls must conform to Section 707, while the horizontal assemblies must comply with Section 711.

Exception 2 permits the required sprinkler system to be deleted from the ceiling areas of atrium where the vertical distance between the atrium floor and atrium ceiling is greater than 16.5 m. A ceiling height of more than 16.5 m is the height at which the system is no longer effective and installing such systems provides little benefit. This exception does not alter the use limitations of the atrium as stated in Section 404.2, nor does it exempt any adjacent floor areas with lower ceiling heights that are included in the atrium boundary in accordance with Exception 1. It is important to note that where a smoke control system is required by Section 404.5, the smoke control design should not take sprinkler activation into account for design fires that are located in areas not protected with sprinklers or in areas where sprinklers are installed but, due to their location, may not be able to control a fire.

404.4 Fire alarm system. A fire alarm system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.14.

Section 907.2.14 of the code contains a requirement for a fire alarm system in atrium connecting more than two stories. In addition, where such atrium are located in Group A, E and M occupancies, an emergency voice/alarm communications system is required.

404.5 Smoke control. A smoke control system shall be installed in accordance with Section 909.

Exceptions:

1. In other than Group I-2, and Group I-1, Condition 2, smoke control is not required for atrium that connect only two stories.

2. A smoke control system is not required for atrium connecting more than two stories when all of the following are met:

2.1. Only the two lowest stories shall be permitted to be open to the atrium.

2.2. All stories above the lowest two stories shall be separated from the atrium in accordance with the provision for a shaft in Section 713.4.

In order to prevent the migration of smoke throughout interconnected levels of a building via the atrium, a mechanical smoke control system is to be installed in all atrium connecting more than two stories and in Group I-2 and Group I-1, Condition 2 buildings where atrium connect two or more stories. The smoke control system is to be designed and installed in accordance with the provisions of Section 909. See Commentary Figure 404.6(1) for examples of where smoke control is and is not required. For spaces such as atrium, the primary method of smoke control, in accordance with Section 909, is the exhaust method. Pressure differences in such a large space will be difficult to achieve. In addition, the

===== Page 0283 =====
pressurization method would not require the area of fire origin to be tenable. The airflow method is impractical with such large spaces. The airflow method is sometimes used in combination with the exhaust method to protect openings into the atrium (see commentary, Section 909). The smoke control system for the atrium is required to be connected to a standby source of power in accordance with Sections 404.7 and 909.11.

Section 402.7.2 for covered mall buildings also references Section 404.5 for smoke control provisions where a covered mall building contains an atrium. It should be noted that where a covered mall building contains an atrium, all areas adjacent to the atrium without separating would need to be addressed when designing the smoke control system as required by Section 404.6, Exception 3.

As discussed in the commentary to Section 404.1, the atrium provisions are basically one of many options provided in the vertical opening requirements in Section 712. Therefore, where another option in Section 712 is chosen, such openings would not be considered atrium and smoke control would not be required.

The first exception, discussed previously, allows smoke control to be omitted from occupancies, other than Group I-2 and Group I-1. Condition 2, where the atrium only connects two stories. The second exception recognizes the level of protection that shaft level construction as required by Section 713.4 provides to the upper stories. The main limitation is that the only stories allowed to be open to the atrium without shaft level protection are the first two stories. This essentially makes the provisions equivalent to a two-story atrium while at the same time recognizing the protection provided by shaft construction.

404.6 Enclosure of atrium. Atrium spaces shall be separated from adjacent spaces by a 1-hour fire barrier constructed in accordance with Section 707 or a horizontal assembly constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Exceptions:

1. A fire barrier is not required where a glass wall forming a smoke partition is provided. The glass wall shall comply with all of the following:

1.1. Automatic sprinklers are provided along both sides of the separation wall and doors, or on the room side only if there is not a walkway on the atrium side. The sprinklers shall be located between 100 mm and 300 mm away from the glass and at intervals along the glass not greater than 1800 mm. The sprinkler system shall be designed so that the entire surface of the glass is wet upon activation of the sprinkler system without obstruction.

1.2. The glass wall shall be installed in a gasketed frame in a manner that the framing system deflects without breaking (loading) the glass before the sprinkler system operates; and.

1.3. Where glass doors are provided in the glass wall, they shall be either self-closing or automatic closing.

2. A fire barrier is not required where a glass-block wall assembly complying with Section 2110 and having a 3/4-hour fire protection rating is provided.

3. A fire barrier is not required between the atrium and the adjoining spaces of up to three floors of the atrium provided that such spaces are accounted for in the design of the smoke control system.

4. A fire barrier is not required between the atrium and the adjoining spaces where the atrium is not required to be provided with a smoke control system.

5. A horizontal assembly is not required between the atrium and openings for escalators complying with Section 712.1.3

6. A horizontal assembly is not required between the atrium and openings for exit access stairways and ramps complying with Item 4 of Section 1019.3.

One of the basic premises of atrium requirements is that an engineered smoke control system combined with an automatic fire sprinkler system that is properly supervised provide an adequate alternative to the fire-resistance rating of a shaft enclosure. It is also recognized that some form of a boundary is required to assist the smoke control system in containing smoke to just the atrium area. The basic requirement, therefore, is that the atrium space be separated from adjacent areas by fire barriers and horizontal assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of at least 1 hour.

Also, openings in the wall are required to be protected, in accordance with Section 707.6. In accordance with Section 713.4, shafts are required to have a fire-resistance rating of at least 2 hours where connecting more than three stories, and 1 hour where connecting two or three stories. The basis for the 1-hour requirement in Section 404.6 is that an automatic sprinkler system can be substituted for the 1 hour of fire resistance of a shaft.

===== Page 0284 =====
enclosure. The allowance is consistent with the 1-hour fire-resistance-rating reduction permitted in high-rise buildings (see Section 403.2.1.2).

In lieu of a 1-hour fire-resistance-rated fire barrier separation, Exception 1 allows adjacent spaces to be separated by glass walls where automatic sprinklers have been installed to protect the glass. The sprinklers are to be located so as to wet the entire surface of the glass wall. Where there is a floor surface on each side of the wall, both sides of the glass must be protected. The glass must be in a gasketed frame such that the framing system can deflect without breaking the glass. Although this exception does not address obstructions or other window treatments, consideration must be given to locating such items to avoid interference with the required sprinkler heads. Without specific test evidence, curtain rods, traverse rods, curtains and draperies must be located at least 300 mm from the window surface [see Commentary Figure 404.6(1)]. The sprinkler system required for Exception 1 is not intended to be a deluge system. Instead, it is intended to protect the glazing material from breakage as a result of thermal shock. It is not necessary to activate all the sprinklers along the glazing material to provide such protection as long as the entire surface of the glazed panel is designed such that it can be wetted by the sprinkler system. Any doors through the required 1-hour fire barrier wall must be 3/4-hour rated in accordance with Table 716.1(3). However, where glass doors occur within the complying glass wall system established in Exception 1, such doors need not be fire-protection rated but they must be either self-closing or automatic-closing.

Exception 2 allows a glass-block wall assembly conforming to Section 2110 in lieu of a 1-hour fire barrier. It is important to note that these glass-block assemblies do not require the sprinkler protection that is required by Exception 1.

Exception 3 recognizes the desire to have at least some floors open to the atrium and permits a maximum of three. The three-floor restriction is consistent with the basic premise that the life safety hazard becomes significant where more than three floors are open and is also consistent with the allowances for covered mall buildings. It should be noted that the three floor levels may be at any height and need not be consecutive floor levels [see Commentary Figure 404.6(2)]. The exception also states that the smoke control design must account for these spaces. This particular reference to the smoke control design does not require that the 1800 m-high layer required by Section 909.8.1 be maintained in these spaces. Instead it is saying that where a smoke control system is required by Section 404.5, such spaces must be accounted for in terms of the hazard they pose to the atrium and to smoke migrating to other adjacent spaces on other stories open to the atrium. Essentially these spaces have simply increased the possible design fires that may send smoke into the atrium, thus threatening to send smoke throughout the building and other adjoining spaces. Where the atrium smoke control system is not designed to handle fires in these areas, the system may become overpowered. This exception can also permit a two-story atrium to have adjacent areas open to the atrium. In this case, since there is no required smoke control system, obviously there is no need to account for the added space (see IBC Interpretation No. 54-07).

Exception 4 eliminates the enclosure of atrium altogether where smoke control is not required by Section 404.5. Essentially two-story atrium need not be enclosed unless the occupancy happens to be either Group I-2 or Group I-1, Condition 2 occupancy.

Exceptions 5 and 6 eliminate horizontal assembly separation at openings for escalators and exit access stairways that meet the requirements of Sections 712.1.3 and 1019.3, Item 4, respectively. These sections provide for draft curtains, closely spaced sprinklers, and limited size of opening specifically for these locations as an alternate means of protection. Also, the number of stories connected by the openings cannot exceed four except in Group B and M occupancies.

As discussed in the commentary to Section 404.1, the atrium requirements are basically one of many options for protecting vertical openings through floors as established in the requirements of Section 712. More specifically, Section 712 has multiple options that are all legitimate approaches to addressing vertical openings. Where there are portions of the building applying other options in Section 712 that are not separated from the atrium, they can be considered part of the atrium themselves and be subject to the smoke control layer height of 1.8 m or could be considered as adjacent spaces and need to be accounted for when designing the smoke control system, as discussed previously. It should be noted that where the space is considered part of the atrium itself, the other options in Section 712 need not be considered as the atrium provisions are already being applied.

===== Page 0285 =====
404.7 Standby power. Equipment required to provide smoke control shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section 909.11.

To enhance the reliability of the required smoke control system, this section of the code mandates that the mechanical smoke control system must be provided with standby power. The reference to Section 909.11 allows the atrium's equipment to receive its primary power from the building's power system. A secondary standby power source is required should the building's primary system fail.

404.8 Interior finish. The interior finish of walls and ceilings of the atrium shall be not less than Class B. Sprinkler protection shall not result in a reduction in class.

Although Chapter 8 contains provisions governing the use of interior finishes, trim and decorative materials, specific limitations are provided for an atrium. Similar to the use limitations contained in Section 404.2, a minimum interior finish classification is specified to limit the fuel load within the atrium spaces. At least a Class B finish is mandated for the walls and ceilings of the atrium. This finish classification limits the material's flame spread index to a range of 26 through 75 and a smoke-developed index rating of 450 or less. The sprinkler reductions shown in Table 803.13 are not applicable to the interior finishes of an atrium space.

404.9 Exit access travel distance. Exit access travel distance for areas open to an atrium shall comply with the requirements of Section 1017.

The means of egress from buildings containing atriums are required to conform to Section 1017 in determining egress requirements for the building as a whole including atriums. Section 1017.3.2 is specific to exit access travel distance within and atrium, including egress travel in the building away from the atrium, egress travel on the lowest level of the atrium, and egress travel in the atrium. "In the atrium" includes balconies or rooms open to the atrium and exit access stairways down through the atrium. Stairways within atriums can be supplemental stairways or, where required for means of egress, either exit access stairways (see Sections 1006.3.2, 1017.3.2.3 and 1019.3) or exit stairways (see Sections 404.10, 1019.3 and 1023.2).

404.10 Exit stairways in an atrium. Where an atrium contains an interior exit stairway all the following shall be met:

1 The entry to the exit stairway is the edge of the closest riser of the exit stairway.

2 The entry of the exit stairway shall have access from a minimum of two directions.
3 The distance between the entry to an exit stairway in an atrium and the entrance to a minimum of one exit stairway enclosed in accordance with Section 1023.2 shall comply with the separation required by Section 1007.1.1.

4 Exit access travel distance shall be measured to the closest riser of the exit stairway.

5 Not more than 50 percent of the exit stairways shall be located in the same atrium.

Stairways within atriums can be supplemental stairways or, where required for means of egress, either exit access stairways (see Sections 404.9, 1006.3.2, 1017.3.2.3 and 1019.3) or exit stairways (see Section 1019.3 and 1023.2).

This section provides additional criteria for exit stairways in atriums. It defines the point of entry to such stairways for determining travel distance. The stairway entry, defined as the edge of the closest riser, shall be available from at least two directions. Since it is not allowed to have more than half of the required exits in the same atrium, the distance between the entries of an exit stairway in an atrium and an enclosed exit stairway must still meet the separation requirements for exit access in Section 1007.1.1 (see Commentary Figure 404(10)).

404.11 Interior exit stairways discharge. Discharge of interior exit stairways through an atrium shall be in accordance with Section 1028.

Section 1028 of the code permits 50 percent of interior exit stairways to terminate on the level of exit discharge such that building occupants travel across the floor of that level before reaching an exterior exit door. The intent of this section is to clearly allow the same option for a building with an enclosed exit stairway that discharges through the lobby of the atrium as an exit stairway within the atrium. It allows the path of egress to pass through the atrium.

## SECTION 405 UNDERGROUND
BUILDINGS

405.1 General. The provisions of Sections 405.2 through 405.9 apply to building spaces having a floor level used for human occupancy more than 9 m below the finished floor of the lowest level of exit discharge.

Exceptions: The provisions of Section 405 are not applicable to the following buildings or portions of buildings:

1. One- and two-family dwellings, sprinkled in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3.

2. Parking garages provided with automatic sprinkler systems in compliance with Section 405.3.

3. Fixed guideway transit systems.

===== Page 0286 =====
4. Grandstands, bleachers, stadiums, arenas and similar facilities.

5. Where the lowest story is the only story that would qualify the building as an underground building and has an area not greater than  \( 140 \, m^{2} \)  and has an occupant load less than 10.

6. Pumping stations and other similar mechanical spaces intended only for limited periodic use by service or maintenance personnel.

An underground building presents a unique hazard to life safety. Because of its isolation and inaccessibility, occupants within the structure and fire fighters attempting to locate and suppress a fire are presented with a unique fire protection challenge.

Underground buildings that require the occupants of the lowest floor level to travel upward for more than 9 m to reach the finished floor of the lowest level of exit discharge present a significant hazard to the occupants. As such, Section 405 is applicable to buildings with a floor level more than 9 m below the finished floor surface of the lowest level of exit discharge (see Commentary Figure 405.1).

To egress the structure, occupants must travel in an upward direction. The direction of occupant travel is the same as the direction that the products of combustion travel. As such, the occupants are potentially exposed to the products of combustion along the entire means of egress.

Fire fighters are also confronted by constant exposure to the products of combustion. Beginning their descent above the actual location of the fire source, fire fighters encounter an increasing amount of smoke, heat and flame as they attempt to locate and extinguish the fire source. These extreme conditions could significantly hinder the effectiveness of the fire department where they are not offset by appropriate fire protection requirements. The requirements for underground buildings are, in some ways, similar to those for high-rise buildings. Both types of structures present an unusual hazard, since they are virtually inaccessible to exterior fire department suppression and rescue operations with the increased potential to trap occupants inside. To counteract these hazards, such structures are required by Section 405.2 to be built of noncombustible, fire-resistance-rated construction.

Additionally, they are required by Section 405.3 to be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system and a smoke control system in accordance with Section 405.5. Standby and emergency power systems are also required in these structures by Section 405.8.

Structures regulated by Section 405 are also subject to all other applicable code provisions. Additionally, underground buildings to which this section does not apply are still subject to all other code provisions, including fire suppression (see Section 903), standpipe systems (see Section 905), and fire alarm and detection (see Section 907).

There are six exceptions to the applicability of Section 405. These exceptions are in consideration of specific types of structures to which the requirements of this section are impractical, unnecessary or to which alternative provisions apply.

405.2 Construction requirements. The underground portion of the building shall be of Type I construction.

Two of the key goals with underground construction are to limit the fuel load and to increase the fire resistance of underground buildings. To reasonably ensure that the building elements will remain structurally sound during exposure to fire, all structural elements of the underground portions are required to be of noncombustible, protected construction. Therefore, any portion of the structure located below grade level is required to be of Type I construction (see Commentary Figure 405.1). Portions of the structure above grade, however, are permitted to be of any type of construction.

Any portion of the structure above ground level must conform to the height and area limitations of Tables 504.3, 504.4 and 506.2. These tables do not regulate the maximum depth of an underground structure; therefore, the height, area and depth of most Type I structures are not limited.

405.3 Automatic sprinkler system. The highest level of exit discharge serving the underground portions of the building and all levels below shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Water-flow switches and control valves shall be supervised in accordance with Section 903.4.

One of the most effective preventive measures to fire growth is the installation of an automatic sprinkler system. Because of the unique conditions for occupant egress and fire department access in the underground portion of a building, automatic sprinkler protection is required. The level of exit discharge and all floor levels below are required to be sprinklered throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. This section does permit a portion of a building to extend above the level of exit discharge and not be equipped with an

===== Page 0287 =====
automatic sprinkler system. where, however, another code section (see Section 903) requires an automatic sprinkler system in the above-ground portion, such a requirement would still be applicable. Note that a smoke control system is required in accordance with Section 405.5. Automatic sprinkler systems are essential elements of any smoke control system. Without suppression, the size of the fire or the resulting products of combustion will rapidly overwhelm most mechanical smoke control systems. The pressurization system requirements in Section 909 are based on the use of sprinklers. Pressure differences needed to contain the smoke to the area of origin would need to be greater in a nonsprinklered building.

405.4 Compartmentation. Compartmentation shall be in accordance with Sections 405.4.1 through 405.4.3.

Compartmentation is a key element in the egress and fire access plan for floor areas in an underground building. Subdivision into separate compartments through the use of smoke barriers (see Section 709) permits occupants to travel horizontally to escape the fire condition and provides a staging area for the fire service (see Commentary Figure 405.4).

405.4.1 Number of compartments. A building having a floor level more than 18 m below the finished floor of the lowest level of exit discharge shall be divided into not fewer than two compartments of approximately equal size. Such compartmentation shall extend through the highest level of exit discharge serving the underground portions of the building and all levels below.

Exception: The lowest story need not be compartmented where the area is not greater than 140 m \( ^{2} \)  and has an occupant load of less than 10.

The 18 m threshold is based on establishing a reasonable limitation on the required vertical travel distance for the occupants and fire service before the added protection of compartmentation is beneficial.

It is important to realize that the code requires, at a minimum, two compartments of approximately equal size. The maximum size of each compartment is not limited and is, therefore, a design decision subject to the approval of the building official.

An exception is permitted at the lowest level of the underground building as long as that level is relatively small in area [less than or equal to 140 m²] and serves a low occupant load (less than 10), since an evacuation to the next higher level would not be expected to adversely affect that level. Note that this exception coordinates with Exception 5 to Section 405.1.
It should be noted that smoke control would be required for all underground buildings, in accordance with Section 405.5, that fall under the scope of Section 405.1. Smoke control systems, which are required to be designed in accordance with Section 909, would generally require the use of smoke barriers to create compartments to achieve the design goals stated in Section 405.5.1. Therefore, even where compartmentation is not required for a building that has a floor level less than 18 m below the finished floor of the level of exit discharge, compartmentation will probably still be utilized within a building to achieve the goals of Section 909. These compartments may be utilized in a different manner than as mandated in Section 405.4.1. In other words, such compartments may not span vertically from the finished floor of the level of exit discharge to the lowest level of the underground building. The compartments may be designated by story (see Commentary Figure 405.4.1).

The provisions for smoke control and compartmentation found in Section 405 were historically focused on smoke exhaust versus smoke control. The code now addresses smoke control, meeting the requirements of Section 909. The requirements of Sections 405.5 and 909 focus on controlling smoke while occupants are trying to leave the building. The requirements of Section 909 can result in more than just two compartments within the building.

405.4.2 Smoke barrier penetration. The compartments shall be separated from each other by a smoke barrier in accordance with Section 709. Penetrations between the two compartments shall be limited to plumbing and electrical piping and conduit that are firestopped in accordance with Section 714. Doorways shall be protected by fire door assemblies that comply with Section 716 and shall be automatic-closing by smoke detection in accordance with Section 716.2.6.6 and are installed in accordance with NFPA 105 and Section 716.2.2.1. Where provided, each compartment shall have an air supply and an exhaust system independent of the other compartments.

The smoke barrier walls and floor/ceiling assemblies that create the compartments must be fire-resistance rated for 1 hour and must meet the requirements of Section 709. Penetrations through the smoke barrier wall are limited to plumbing, piping and penetrations that are vital to the fire protection systems (i.e., sprinkler piping and electrical raceways). Special fire-resistance-rated doors are required to maintain the intended compartmentation, including gasketing and drop sills. Separate air distribution systems are

===== Page 0288 =====
required for each compartment. Components of the air distribution system are not permitted to penetrate the smoke barrier walls. These requirements are intended to help provide for the independence of the compartments separated by the smoke barrier walls by minimizing the penetrations therein. Note also that Section 711.2 addresses horizontal assemblies that are used as smoke barriers. The separate air distribution systems required by this section are focused on the smoke compartments specifically required by this section and would not necessarily require separate systems for each compartment as created by the requirements of Section 405.5.

405.4.3 Elevators. Where elevators are provided, each compartment shall have direct access to an elevator. Where an elevator serves more than one compartment, an enclosed elevator lobby shall be provided and shall be separated from each compartment by a smoke barrier in accordance with Section 709. Doorways in the smoke barrier shall be protected by fire door assemblies that comply with Section 716, shall comply with the smoke and draft control assembly requirements of Section 716.2.2.1 with the UL 1784 test conducted without an artificial bottom seal, and shall be automatic-closing by smoke detection in accordance with Section 716.2.6.6.

Elevators are permitted to serve more than one compartment where properly protected. Where different compartments utilize a common elevator, a smoke barrier consisting of a 1-hour fire-resistance-rated elevator lobby is required. This lobby provides additional separation between adjacent compartments, thus helping to create their independence from the immediate effects of fire (see Commentary Figure 405.4). Essentially, the elevator lobby as prescribed in this section creates another smoke compartment within the building.

405.5 Smoke control system. A smoke control system shall be provided in accordance with Sections 405.5.1 and 405.5.2.

A smoke control system is required for all underground buildings. The smoke control system is an integral part of the required fire protection systems for underground buildings and is focused on the safety of occupants while exiting the building during a fire. In the case where the building contains both underground and above-ground portions, such specific details and requirements are listed in Sections 405.5.1 and 405.5.2.

405.5.1 Control system. A smoke control system is required to control the migration of products of combustion in accordance with Section 909 and the provisions of this section. Smoke control shall restrict movement of smoke to the general area of fire origin and maintain means of egress in a usable condition.

The general design requirements, special inspection and test requirements, and applicable smoke control methods are contained within Section 909. The performance goal of the smoke control system is to contain the smoke and hot gases generated by a fire condition to the immediate area of origin. "Containing to the immediate area of origin" is usually taken to mean the compartment of origin. This allows the building occupants to access their required exits and evacuate the building before smoke movement traps them below grade. Generally, the type of system will be a pressurization system where the smoke is managed by maintaining pressure differences across smoke barriers. It could be possible that a different type of system such as an exhaust system is required in larger, more open spaces such as an atrium. It is important to note that the systems in Section 909 are intended for the protection of occupants and do not necessarily provide longer term capacity for the fire department. In addition, such systems are not intended as a method of smoke exhaust for salvage and overhaul after a fire. It is recognized that overhaul in underground buildings after a fire is far more complex because the structure is entirely underground, but as Section 909 is currently written, such systems are not specifically designed with this role in mind.

As discussed in the commentary to Section 405.4.1, the smoke control system required by Section 405.5 will likely result in many smoke compartments in order to meet the design criteria of Section 909.

405.5.2 Compartment smoke control system. Where compartmentation is required, each compartment shall have an independent smoke control system. The system shall be automatically activated and capable of manual operation in accordance with Sections 907.2.18 and 907.2.19.

The compartmentation referred to in this section is that discussed in Section 405.4.1, which requires that the building be separated from the story of level of exit discharge to the lowest level in the building. It is not the intent that each smoke compartment (smoke zone), as created through the application of Section 405.5.1, would be required to have independent smoke control systems (see commentary, Section 405.4.2).

405.6 Fire alarm systems. A fire alarm system shall be provided where required by Sections 907.2.18 and 907.2.19.

===== Page 0289 =====
The ability to communicate and offer warning of a fire can increase the time available for egress from the building. There are two components to the requirements for detection and alarm systems for underground buildings. The first aspect covered in Section 907.2.18 are smoke detection requirements based on the installation of a smoke control system. A fire alarm system is not required but an audible alarm sounding at a constantly attended location is required. Once the underground building has a floor level greater than 18 m below the finished floor of the level of exit discharge, a manual fire alarm system is required. This system is also required to be an emergency voice/alarm communications system. This allows better communication as occupants respond more readily to voice commands versus alarm signals.

405.7 Means of egress. Means of egress shall be in accordance with Sections 405.7.1 and 405.7.2.

This section is simply the introduction for means of egress requirements in underground buildings. Egress from underground buildings can be more challenging than buildings above grade; thus, additional requirements are necessary. Chapter 10 applies to underground buildings. Chapter 10 provisions are revised by this section.

405.7.1 Number of exits. Each floor level shall be provided with not fewer than two exits. Where compartmentation is required by Section 405.4, each compartment shall have not fewer than one exit and not fewer than one exit access doorway into the adjoining compartment.

The means of egress from underground buildings is an integral part of the safety precautions necessary to abate the hazards of people being located more than 9 m below the level of exit discharge. Sections 405.7.1 and 405.7.2 provide the minimum number of exits and requirements for smokeproof enclosures. These provisions create safe and usable elements that the building occupants can enter to flee the immediate effects of a fire located well below grade.

The arrangement of exits and exit access doors for an underground building is regulated by this section (see Commentary Figure 405.4).

Based on the requirements of this section and Section 405.4, an underground building having a floor level more than 9 m below the level of exit discharge requires a minimum of two exits and cannot qualify as a single-exit building. Additional exits may be required in accordance with Section 1006.2. Underground buildings requiring compartmentation in accordance with Section 405.4.1 must have an exit in each and every compartment plus a doorway into the adjoining compartment.

405.7.2 Smokeproof enclosure. Every required stairway serving floor levels more than 9 m below the finished floor of its level of exit discharge shall comply with the requirements for a smokeproof enclosure as provided in Section 1023.12.

In order for interior exit stairways to provide the necessary means of egress, all stairways of an underground building must be constructed as smokeproof enclosures. The requirements for smokeproof enclosures are contained in Section 1023.12, which in turn references Section 909.20, and include a 2-hour enclosure along with limited access via a vestibule where the mechanical ventilation alternative described in Section 909.20 is provided. Another alternative is a pressurized stairway. The requirements for pressurized stairways are also listed in Section 909.20. Pressurized interior exit stairways do not require a vestibule, but pressure differences as prescribed in Section 909.20.5 need to be provided and demonstrated through testing. These provisions for a smokeproof enclosure are intended to maintain a protected path of travel for building occupants to egress the underground building and also allow the fire department to enter for rescue and fire-fighting operations.

405.8 Standby and emergency power. A standby power system complying with Section 2702 shall be provided for the standby power loads specified in Section 405.8.1. An emergency power system complying with Section 2702 shall be provided for the emergency power loads specified in Section 405.8.2.

All underground buildings regulated by this section are required to be provided with standby and emergency power systems to increase the probability that critical systems will be operational in the event of a loss of normal power supply. The purpose of the standby and emergency power systems is to provide an alternative means of supplying power to selected building systems should the normal electrical source fail. The systems that must be provided with standby power are specified in Section 405.8.1. The systems required to be provided with emergency power are specified in Section 405.8.2.

405.8.1 Standby power loads. The following are classified as standby power loads:

1 Smoke control system.

2 Ventilation and automatic fire detection equipment for smokeproof enclosures.

3 Elevators, as required in Section 3003.

===== Page 0290 =====
The standby power system is required to supply electrical power to equipment that is essential to emergency egress, and firefighting and rescue operations. See the commentary to Sections 403.4.8.3 and 3003 regarding how elevators operate under standby power.

405.8.2 Emergency power loads. The following are classified as emergency power loads:

1 Emergency voice/alarm communications systems.

2 Fire alarm systems.

3 Automatic fire detection systems.

4 Elevator car lighting.

5 Means of egress and exit sign illumination as required by Chapter 10.

6 Fire pumps.

The emergency power system is required to supply electrical power to equipment that is essential to detecting and warning others of a fire condition, to provide water to the sprinkler system and to provide for illuminated evacuation of the underground building. Because of the critical nature of the systems and the difficulty associated with evacuation, firefighting and rescue, the loads must be picked up within 10 seconds after failure of the normal power supply. This maximum time is consistent with the requirements of NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401).

405.9 Standpipe system. The underground building shall be equipped throughout with a standpipe system in accordance with Section 905.

Just as high-rise buildings or other large buildings with special features are required to be provided with a standpipe system, so are underground buildings. A Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipe system must be provided. Standpipe systems allow fire department or other trained personnel to fight fires at basement levels where it is impractical to run supply lines from fire department trucks or outside hydrants. A quick and convenient water source for fire department use is essential to containing an underground fire.

## SECTION 406 MOTOR-VEHICLE-
RELATED OCCUPANCIES

Included in this section of the code are the special use and occupancy requirements for those buildings and structures that house motor vehicles. Corresponding requirements for aircraft-related occupancies can be found in Section 412. By definition, all structures that provide services or are used for the storage or parking of motor vehicles are regulated by these provisions. These requirements are applicable regardless of the type of fuel source used to power the vehicles' motors, the number of vehicles present, whether the vehicles are privately or commercially owned and whether they are used strictly for passengers or for freight. Typically, fire hazards for motor-vehicle occupancies are low because of the limited amounts of combustibles present along with the steel frame and metal clad bodies. Motor vehicle structures normally have sufficient space around each vehicle for parking purposes, which serves to further limit the fuel load. The design occupant loads are usually low and pose little, if any, life safety risks.

This section contains requirements for six different motor-vehicle occupancies. Section 406.2 includes general requirements for all the motor-vehicle-related occupancies. Section 406.3 addresses private garages and carports, which are classified as Group U occupancies. All other parking garages are considered to be public parking garages (Section 406.4) and divided into either open parking garages (Section 406.5) or enclosed parking garages (Section 406.6). These Group S-2 structures represent a slightly higher hazard than private garages or carports. As such, the heights and areas of these structures along with their type of construction classification are controlled. Requirements are also given for those buildings and structures that provide service, care and repair of the vehicles. Stations where motor fuels are sold and dispensed are classified as Group M occupancies (Section 406.7). Garages that provide repair services for vehicles also represent a slightly higher hazard; therefore, Section 406.8 identifies those additional code requirements necessary to abate the hazards of repair garages and their Group S-1 occupancy classification.

Although not specifically referenced in the code, both Section 304 of SBC 501 and Section 305 of SBC 1201 address the location of mechanical equipment in both private and public garages.

406.1 General. All motor-vehicle-related occupancies shall comply with Section 406.2. Private garages and carports shall also comply with Section 406.3. Open public parking garages shall also comply with Sections 406.4 and 406.5. Enclosed public parking garages shall also comply with Sections 406.4 and 406.6. Motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall also comply with Section 406.7. Repair garages shall also comply with Section 406.8.

The special provisions for motor-vehicle-related occupancies address private garages and carports, public parking (both open and enclosed) garages, motor fuel-dispensing facilities and repair garages. All motor-vehicle-related occupancies are subject to the

===== Page 0291 =====
provisions of Section 406.2. Individual uses are subject to one or more of the subsequent sections. This section provides a guide to specific sections.

406.2 Design. Private garages and carports, open and enclosed public parking garages, motor fuel-dispensing facilities and repair garages shall comply with Sections 406.2.1 through 406.2.9.

Common design features found in motor-vehicle related occupancies are addressed in the subsections of Section 406.2.

406.2.1 Automatic garage door openers and vehicular gates. Automatic garage door openers shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 325. Where provided, automatic vehicular gates shall comply with Section 3110.

This section provides a requirement that automatic door openers comply with UL 325 and a reference to Section 3110, which contains additional requirements. This provision is also found in SBC 1101/1102.

406.2.2 Clear height. The clear height of each floor level in vehicle and pedestrian traffic areas shall be not less than 2100 mm. Canopies under which fuels are dispensed shall have a clear height in accordance with Section 406.7.2.

Exception: A lower clear height is permitted for a parking tier in mechanical-access open parking garages where approved by the building official.

The clear height is only required for vehicle and pedestrian traffic areas. Van parking, where provided, is addressed in Sections 406.2.3 and 1106. The clear height at canopies regulated under Section 406.7.2 is 4050 mm. The exception addresses mechanical-access parking facilities. These facilities function more like equipment than your typical building. People drive their car to a single spot from which the car is mechanically lifted and placed in a storage slot. Except on an occasion where the equipment malfunctions, no one is expected to be in the upper tiers.

406.2.3 Accessible parking spaces. Where parking is provided, accessible parking spaces, access aisles and vehicular routes serving accessible parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 1106.

This section provides a reference to the Chapter 11 section that addresses parking accessibility. Accessible parking and van accessible parking requirements can affect the design of most parking facilities, including the ceiling height within an enclosed facility.

406.2.4 Floor surfaces. Floor surfaces shall be of concrete or similar approved noncombustible and nonabsorbent materials. The area of floor used for the parking of automobiles or other vehicles shall be sloped to facilitate the movement of liquids to a drain or toward the main vehicle entry doorway. The surface of vehicle fueling pads in motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be in accordance with Section 406.7.1.

## Exceptions:

1. Asphalt parking surfaces shall be permitted at ground level for public parking garages and private carports.

2. Slip-resistant, nonabsorbent, interior floor finishes having a critical radiant flux not more than 0.45 W/cm², as determined by ASTM E648 or NFPA 253, shall be permitted in repair garages.

To avoid acquiring a buildup of flammable liquids on the floor of parking garages, the floor finish is required to be noncombustible and nonabsorbent. Floors must be sloped toward a drain or toward the main vehicle doors. Because of pollution concerns, however, garage floors are not automatically required to be drained into the building drainage system. This is consistent with requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for storm water drainage, as well as the philosophy of hazardous material handling (i.e., localize spills and treat them). If floor drains are provided, however, they must be installed in accordance with SBC 701. The final sentence simply provides a reference for fuel-dispensing facilities.

Exception 1 allows asphalt paving on the ground level of public parking garages and for private carports. Exception 1, in part, recognizes that many states have allowed the use of asphalt paving surfaces at grade levels of parking garages with no record of fire hazards. This exception does not allow asphalt paving to be used on stories above or below grade. The carport part of the exception does not include enclosed private garages because of potential safety hazards. The use of a combustible floor finish that could absorb flammable and combustible liquids commonly used and stored in garages presents a potential safety hazard to the occupants of an attached building.

Exception 2 allows flooring that is a Class I material, as determined through the testing protocols of either of the listed standards. This allows a limited use of combustible flooring material. See Sections 804.2 and 804.3.

406.2.5 Sleeping rooms. Openings between a motor vehicle-related occupancy and a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted.

Regardless of the motor-vehicle-related occupancy (private or public garages, carports, repair garages, fuel dispensing facilities), there

===== Page 0292 =====
can be no openings in a common wall with a room used for sleeping. The risks of a fire and smoke quickly spreading into adjacent areas where occupants may be sleeping are too great.

406.2.6 Fuel dispensing. The dispensing of fuel shall only be permitted in motor fuel-dispensing facilities in accordance with Section 406.7.

Essentially, this provision prohibits the dispensing of fuels in any of these occupancies and uses unless the criteria for a fuel-dispensing facility are met. Motor fuel-dispensing facilities are classified as a Group M occupancy (see Section 309). It is the only motor-vehicle-related occupancy that is Group M. Placing fuel dispensing in any other motor vehicle facility results in a mixed-occupancy condition subject to the distinct requirements found in Section 406.7.

406.2.7 Electric vehicle charging stations and systems. systems shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401). Electric vehicle charging system equipment shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2202. Electric vehicle supply equipment shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2594. Accessibility to electric vehicle charging stations shall be provided in accordance with Section 1107.

The installation of electric vehicle charging stations (EVCS) is rapidly increasing. This section provides minimum requirements to provide minimum safeguards for the installation of these stations, where provided in any motor-vehicle-related occupancy. Scoping requirements for accessible EVCS space are provided in Section 1107. Technical provisions (i.e., how to) are located in the 2017 edition of ICC A117.1.

406.2.8 Mixed occupancies and uses. Mixed uses shall be allowed in the same building as public parking garages and repair garages in accordance with Section 508.1. Mixed uses in the same building as an open parking garage are subject to Sections 402.4.2.3, 406.5.11, 508.1, 510.3, 510.4 and 510.7.

In addition to the mixed-use and mixed-occupancy provisions referenced in this section, Section 406.3.2 also references Section 508 where private garages are in a mixed-occupancy building other than where adjoining a dwelling unit. Private garages are classified as a Group U occupancy. Section 406.3.3.1 addresses carport and dwelling unit separation. Many of these uses will have integral office and administration areas. Repair garages are frequently part of an automobile dealership. In Section 508.1, the building designer has available three options to address the mixed-use and occupancy issues. Keep in mind that Sections 510.2, 510.3, 510.4, 510.7, 510.8 and 510.9 contain special provisions for mixed occupancies where the parking garages are located above or below other groups.

406.2.9 Equipment and appliances. Equipment and appliances shall be installed in accordance with Sections 406.2.9.1 through 406.2.9.3 and SBC 501, SBC 1201 and NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401).

Sections 406.2.9.1 through 406.2.9.3 spell out requirements for equipment and appliance installations in motor-vehicle-related occupancies. To some extent, they are optional approaches to address such installations. In addition, there are additional installation requirements found in Section 304 of SBC 501 and Section 305 of SBC 1201.

406.2.9.1 Elevation of ignition sources. Equipment and appliances having an ignition source and located in hazardous locations and public garages, private garages, repair garages, automotive motor fuel-dispensing facilities and parking garages shall be elevated such that the source of ignition is not less than 450 mm above the floor surface on which the equipment or appliance rests. For the purpose of this section, rooms or spaces that are not part of the living space of a dwelling unit and that communicate directly with a private garage through openings shall be considered to be part of the private garage.

Exception: Elevation of the ignition source is not required for appliances that are listed as flammable vapor ignition resistant.

This section primarily addresses equipment that has an ignition source. This is done to minimize the possibility of any spilled flammable liquids and resulting vapors from coming in contact with the ignition sources of heating equipment. For all motor-vehicle related occupancies, all possible ignition sources must be controlled and isolated. The overriding requirement is to elevate the source of ignition not less than 450 mm above the floor. One solution to elevating the ignition source would be to install the appliances in rooms that are not part of the garage. This section addresses connecting rooms to private garages. See Section 406.2.9.1.1 for other parking garage design options. The concern about rooms connected to a private garage but not part of a dwelling unit's living space is directed at adjoining closets or storage areas. Sometimes laundry equipment is found in a closet accessed via the garage.

===== Page 0293 =====
406.2.9.1.1 Parking garages. Connection of a parking garage with any room in which there is a fuel fired appliance shall be by means of a vestibule providing a two-doorway separation, except that a single door is permitted where the sources of ignition in the appliance are elevated in accordance with Section 406.2.9.

Exception: This section shall not apply to appliance installations complying with Section 406.2.9.2 or 406.2.9.3.

Putting a fuel-fired appliance in another room or space that is not part of the motor-vehicle-related occupancy is a solution if the room is isolated from the motor-vehicle-related use. Unfortunately, if there are communicating doors from such a separate room to a parking garage, the hazard of having an ignition source close to the floor extends into the room. Therefore, such an adjacent room needs to be accessed by way of a vestibule. Or it can have a single door if the appliance is elevated consistent with one of the other options in Section 406.2.9.

406.2.9.2 Public garages. Appliances located in public garages, motor fuel-dispensing facilities, repair garages or other areas frequented by motor vehicles shall be installed not less than 2400 mm above the floor. Where motor vehicles are capable of passing under an appliance, the appliance shall be installed at the clearances required by the appliance manufacturer and not less than 300 mm higher than the tallest vehicle garage door opening.

Exception: The requirements of this section shall not apply where the appliances are protected from motor vehicle impact and installed in accordance with Section 406.2.9.1 and NFPA 30A.

The code simply says in motor-vehicle-related occupancies, appliances have to be at least 2400 mm above the floor, or higher if required by the manufacturer, or higher if the garage door opening has more than a 2.1 m clearance. The exception allows lower heights if some protection from vehicle impact is provided, such as bollards.

406.2.9.3 Private garages. Appliances located in private garages and carports shall be installed with a minimum clearance of 1800 mm above the floor.

Exception: The requirements of this section shall not apply where the appliances are protected from motor vehicle impact and are installed in accordance with Section 406.2.9.1.
This section is parallel to Section 406.2.9, but applies only to private garages and carports. For these facilities, the clearance height is simply 1800 mm or more. Again, the exception allows lower heights where protection of the appliance is provided.

406.3 Private garages and carports. Private garages and carports shall comply with Sections 406.2 and 406.3, or they shall comply with Sections 406.2 and 406.4.

This section regulates private garages and carports. Such garages are frequently attached to residential type occupancies. However, it is not mandatory that a private garage be accessible to a Group R occupancy. The code defines private garages (See Section 202). The definition states that a private garage does not accommodate repairing or servicing vehicles for a profit. But a person using the garage to service their own vehicle is not prohibited. Private garages have a choice of meeting the provision for private garages (Section 406.3) or public garages (Section 406.4).

406.3.1 Classification. Private garages and carports shall be classified as Group U occupancies. Each private garage shall be not greater than 100 m² in area. Multiple private garages are permitted in a building where each private garage is separated from the other private garages by 1-hour fire barriers in accordance with Section 707, or 1-hour horizontal assemblies in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Private garages and carports are usually considered accessory to the building they serve. Section 312 classifies these utility and miscellaneous uses as Group U. This section limits an individual private garage to 100 m² in area. However, the code recognizes the concept of having multiple private garages in the same structure. Where such occurs, there is a minimum 1-hour fire barrier between individual private garages (and a 1-hour horizontal assembly where private garages are on multiple levels). However, there is no upper limit on the number of private garages that could be in any one structure. Section 406.3.2 specifies how private garages are to be separated from other occupancies.

406.3.2 Separation. For other than private garages adjacent to dwelling units, the separation of private garages from other occupancies shall comply with Section 508. Separation of private garages from dwelling units shall comply with Sections 406.3.2.1 through 406.3.2.2.

The section directs code users to places for separation requirements between private garages and other occupancies. The separations other than from dwelling units are

===== Page 0294 =====
treated no differently than other occupancy separations and therefore must comply with Section 508. Separation between private garages and dwelling units is specified in the two following sections. Please note that individual private garages in the same building are separated by 1-hour fire barriers as specified in Section 406.3.1.

406.3.2.1 Dwelling unit separation. The private garage shall be separated from the dwelling unit and its attic area by means of gypsum board, not less than 12.5 mm in thickness, applied to the garage side. Garages beneath habitable rooms shall be separated from all habitable rooms above by not less than a 16 mm Type X gypsum board or equivalent and 12.5 mm gypsum board applied to structures supporting the separation from habitable rooms above the garage. Door openings between a private garage and the dwelling unit shall be equipped with either solid wood doors or solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 35 mm in thickness, or doors in compliance with Section 716.2.2.1 with a fire protection rating of not less than 20 minutes. Doors shall be self-closing and self-latching.

Where a private garage is attached to a dwelling unit, the adjacent areas (including attics) are to be separated to provide a minimum level of protection. This separation is to be constructed of not less than 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard applied to the garage side. In a location where the garage is beneath any type of habitable space, the separation requirement is increased by requiring 16 mm Type X gypsum board or some other material that would provide an equivalent level of protection. Bearing walls and other structural elements that support the horizontal separation shall be protected with minimum 12.5 mm gypsum board. Doors opening within the adjacent wall are required to be protected with a minimum 35 mm solid core wood or 35 mm solid or honeycomb steel door. Although the 35 mm solid core wood and honeycomb steel doors are not listed as fire doors, they still provide some protection. Alternatively, doors with a 20-minute fire protection rating in accordance with Section 716.2.2.1 may be used. All door openings from the garage, whether solid core wood, honeycomb steel or 20-minute rated, are prohibited from opening directly into a bedroom or any other room used for sleeping purposes. It is important to note that this separation requirement, including the protection and the limitation on the openings, is only applicable to garages and not to carports.

406.3.2.2 Ducts. Ducts in a private garage and ducts penetrating the walls or ceilings separating the dwelling unit from the garage, including its attic area, shall be constructed of sheet steel of not less than 0.5 mm in thickness and shall not have openings into the garage.

Ducts in the walls and ceilings that do not penetrate into the garage are already protected by the gypsum wallboard; therefore, additional separation is not necessary. Where ducts penetrate through the separation, then the specified protection must be provided.

406.3.3 Carports. Carports shall be open on not fewer than two sides. Carports open on fewer than two sides shall be considered to be a garage and shall comply with the requirements for private garages.

Carports are covered structures, either freestanding or attached to the side of a building, for the purposes of providing shelter for motor vehicles. Carports must be open on at least two sides. This openness allows a fire condition to vent quickly to the outside. The openness of a carport probably results in carport fires being detected much earlier than in enclosed parking. The openness of a carport also results in less storage activity and therefore lower chance of fire. Attached carports that are not open on at least two sides are considered a garage and must then be separated from the adjoining dwelling or other occupancy. Where a garage door is provided on a carport, that side should not be considered an open side.

406.3.3.1 Carport separation. A separation is not required between a Group R-3 and U carport, provided that the carport is entirely open on two or more sides and there are not enclosed areas above.

A roofed structure such as a carport, open on two or more sides without any enclosed uses above, poses no special hazard to the occupants of the dwelling. Were a fire to start under the carport roof, the smoke, hot gases and flames would be able to escape out the open sides, providing the structure with an adequate amount of protection. See the commentary to Section 406.3.3 for additional related discussion.

406.4 Public parking garages. Parking garages, other than private garages, shall be classified as public parking garages and shall comply with the provisions of Sections 406.2 and 406.4 and shall be classified as either an open parking garage or an enclosed parking garage. Open parking garages shall also comply with Section 406.5. Enclosed parking garages shall also comply with Section 406.6 See Section 510 for special provisions for parking garages.

There are fundamentally two types of parking garages regulated by SBC 201: private garages and public garages. Private garages

===== Page 0295 =====
are addressed by Section 406.3 and are defined in Section 202. Those structures that fall outside of the scope of Section 406.3 and the Section 202 definition of "Private garage" are considered as public parking garages. The primary difference between private and public garages is the size of the facility, rather than the use. Strictly limited in permissible height and area, private parking garages are typically not commercial in nature. They serve only a specific tenant or building and are not open for public use. It is important to note that there is no implication that public parking garages must be open to the public, as they are only considered public in comparison to private garages.

Public parking garages are considered to be storage occupancies (Group S-2). In addition to the provisions of Sections 406.4, 406.5 and 406.6, public parking garages must also comply with the code provisions for Group S occupancies.

The overall building fire loading in public parking garages is typically low because of the considerable amount of metal in vehicles, which absorbs heat, and the average weight of combustibles per square meter being relatively low approximately 10 kg/m \( ^{2} \) . Still, a vehicle fire may be quite extensive.

Public parking garages are divided into one of two categories. Those parking garages that contain sufficient clear openings in their exterior walls that meet the requirements of Section 406.5.2 can be classified as open parking garages. Open parking garages must conform to Sections 406.2, 406.4, and 406.5. All other public parking garages must be considered as enclosed parking garages and must comply with Sections 406.2, 406.4 and 406.6. Special height and area provisions for parking garages located above or below other uses and occupancies are contained in Section 510.

406.4.1 Guards. Guards shall be provided in accordance with Section 1015. Guards serving as vehicle barriers shall comply with Sections 406.4.2 and 1015.

For the same reasons as identified in the commentary to Section 1015, guards are required around all vertical openings in the floors and roofs of parking garages where the vertical distance between adjacent levels exceeds 750 mm. As a separate requirement, vehicle barriers are required at specified locations where the vertical distance between adjacent levels exceeds 300 mm. Guards that serve a dual purpose of guard and vehicle barrier systems must comply with both Sections 406.4.2 and 1015.
406.4.2 Vehicle barriers. Vehicle barriers not less than 850 mm in height shall be placed where the vertical distance from the floor of a drive lane or parking space to the ground or surface directly below is greater than 300 mm. Vehicle barriers shall comply with the loading requirements of Section 1607.10.

Exception: Vehicle barriers are not required in vehicle storage compartments in a mechanical access parking garage.

This section requires vehicle barriers at locations where a drop off exists that is 300 mm or more down to adjacent parking spaces or drive lanes. Vehicle barriers are to be designed in accordance with Section 1607.9. The vehicle barriers are required to resist a single load of 27.5 kN. The minimum height of the barriers is 850 mm, in recognition of the extensive number of vehicles with higher profiles on the road today. Barriers are not required in areas where employees of the garage are parking the vehicles, such as mechanical access garages.

406.4.3 Ramps. Vehicle ramps shall not be considered as required exits unless pedestrian facilities are provided. Vehicle ramps that are utilized for vertical circulation as well as for parking shall not exceed a slope of 1:15 (6.67 percent).

Since the vehicular ramps of parking garages are open to all levels, they are directly exposed to the effects of smoke and hot gases. In addition, the vehicle ramps are often sloped at a rate greater than 1:12 (8-percent slope). These ramps, therefore, cannot be counted as part of the required exits from each level or tier. Certainly, occupants can travel from their vehicles on sloped parking levels to access the required exit stairways. However, occupants cannot continuously travel down the vehicle ramps to reach the exit discharge unless the slope is 1:15 or less and sidewalks or other protected walking surfaces are provided.

406.5 Open parking garages. Open parking garages shall comply with Sections 406.2, 406.4, 406.5.

The code establishes four types of garages: private, enclosed parking, repair garages and open parking. With the exception of private garages, all such structures are classified as Group S. Unlike other storage occupancies in which the fuel load is evenly distributed, garages represent a different fire hazard. Section 406.2 is applicable to all types of garages. Section 406.5 provides requirements that are unique to open parking garages, while Section 406.3 addresses private garages and Section 406.6 addresses enclosed parking garages. Section 406.4 requirements are

===== Page 0296 =====
applicable to both open and enclosed public garages.

Because of generally fast-burning upholstery and gasoline or diesel fuel content, fires in individual vehicles can be quite extensive. Because of both the overall combustible loading within a parking garage, which yields a low combustible fuel load [approximately 10 kg/m \( ^{2} \) ], and the considerable amount of metal in vehicles, which absorbs heat, the overall fire hazards are low. Because of the permanently open exterior walls of open parking garages, which permit the dissipation of heated gases, special provisions are made for heights and areas of such structures.

Open parking garages are classified as Group S-2 and all of the provisions for this occupancy group are applicable except as modified herein.

406.5.1 Construction. Open parking garages shall be of Type I, II or IV construction. Open parking garages shall meet the design requirements of Chapter 16. For vehicle barriers, see Section 406.4.2.

One of the basic premises of the provisions for open parking garages is that the overall fuel load is low and that the average fuel load per area is low. The construction of open parking garages, therefore, is restricted to Type I, II or IV, so that the combustible loading of cars is not exceeded by that of the structure.

406.5.2 Openings. For natural ventilation purposes, the exterior side of the structure shall have uniformly distributed openings on two or more sides. The area of such openings in exterior walls on a tier shall be not less than 20 percent of the total perimeter wall area of each tier. The aggregate length of the openings considered to be providing natural ventilation shall be not less than 40 percent of the perimeter of the tier. Interior walls shall be not less than 20 percent open with uniformly distributed openings.

Exception: Openings are not required to be distributed over 40 percent of the building perimeter where the required openings are uniformly distributed over two opposing sides of the building.

Key attributes of an open parking garage, based on the fire records of such facilities, include the exterior wall openings and ventilation of the structure. This section requires that 40 percent of the building perimeter has openings that are uniformly distributed on not less than two sides of the structure. In addition to providing for adequate distribution, the section also requires that a minimum of 20 percent of the total perimeter wall area at each level must be open. The openings in the exterior wall must be free so that natural ventilation will occur without interior wall obstructions.

In instances where the open parking garage is provided with openings on two opposite sides of the structure, thereby providing cross ventilation, the 40- percent criterion does not apply. However, the openings must still meet the 20-percent criterion of the total perimeter wall area.

In every case, interior walls are to have distributed openings totaling 20 percent of the wall area to allow ventilation of all spaces (see Commentary Figure 406.5.2).

406.5.2.1 Openings below grade. Where openings below grade provide required natural ventilation, the outside horizontal clear space shall be one and one-half times the depth of the opening. The width of the horizontal clear space shall be maintained from grade down to the bottom of the lowest required opening.

Because permanently open exterior walls provide sufficient natural ventilation and permit the dissipation of heated gases, open parking garages are viewed as a relatively low hazard. However, there are situations where the required openings are located below the surrounding grade, which makes it more difficult to provide the necessary openness required for good performance. A clear horizontal space as described by this section must be provided adjacent to the garage's exterior openings to allow for adequate air movement through the opening. As the distance of the openings below the adjoining ground level increases, the minimum required exterior horizontal clear space also increases proportionally. The dimensional requirements are based on the provisions of Section 1202.5.1.2. The extent of the required clear space allows for adequate exterior open space to meet the intent and dynamics of natural ventilation requirements for open parking garages.

406.5.3 Uses. Mixed uses shall be allowed in the same building as an open parking garage subject to the provisions of Sections 402.4.2.3, 406.5.11, 508.1, 510.3, 510.4 and 510.7.

Open parking garages can be constructed as part of a mixed-occupancy building. The building cannot be designed to take advantage of the height and area increases allowed by Sections 406.5.4.1 and 406.5.5. The code provides references to the placement of open parking garages as part of a covered or open mall building. It also provides specific references to three of the special building provisions in Section 510 where open parking garages may be located above or below other

===== Page 0297 =====
buildings. There is also a reference to the mixed-occupancy provisions of Section 508. There is also a reference to Section 406.5.11, where there are specific prohibitions for certain activities within an open parking garage.

406.5.4 Area and height. Area and height of open parking garages shall be limited as set forth in Chapter 5 for Group S-2 occupancies and as further provided for in Section 508.1.

Where an open parking garage is located within a building containing other occupancies, the code requires that the height and area limitations for the open parking garage be determined by using the normal provisions found in Chapter 5 for a Group S-2 occupancy. This essentially means that the garage would receive the same allowable areas of an enclosed parking garage or a storage building that was classified in the same occupancy.

406.5.4.1 Single use. Where the open parking garage is used exclusively for the parking or storage of private motor vehicles, and the building is without other uses, the area and height shall be permitted to comply with Table 406.5.4, along with increases allowed by Section 406.5.5.

Exception: The grade-level tier is permitted to contain an office, waiting and toilet rooms having a total combined area of not more than 100 m². Such area need not be separated from the open parking garage.
In open parking garages having a spiral or sloping floor, the horizontal projection of the structure at any cross section shall not exceed the allowable area per parking tier. In the case of an open parking garage having a continuous spiral floor, each 2900 mm of height, or portion thereof, shall be considered under these provisions to be a tier.

Where an open parking garage is located in a building that is only used as a parking garage, the type of hazard that is created by the occupancy is significantly lower than other buildings. Because of the openness requirements in Section 406.5.2 and the dissipation of heated gases, as well as the overall low fuel load, the height and area limitations for single-use open parking garages are not the same as for other buildings of Group S-2. The height requirements are based on actual fire experience and full-scale fire tests conducted in the United States, Great Britain, Japan and Switzerland. For these single-use buildings that comply with the other provisions of this section, Table 406.5.4 replaces Tables 504.3, 504.4 and 506.2 for the determination of heights and areas. Although these open parking garages are considered as being a single occupancy, the exception permits a limited amount of support-type spaces to be included in the structure.

See Table 406.5.4.
Table 406.5.4 is used in the same manner as Table 504.3, Table 504.4 and Table 506.2. For a given construction type, the height and area limitations can be determined from the table. For example, an open parking garage of Type IIB construction may be a maximum of eight tiers in height for a ramp access garage. The area would be limited to 4645 m² per tier. The height restrictions in the table are measured as defined in Section 202. In this instance, parking may be permitted on the highest level of the structure, which also constitutes the roof of the structure. The areas provided are per tier.

406.5.5 Area and height increases. The allowable area and height of open parking garages shall be increased in accordance with the provisions of this section. Garages with sides open on three-fourths of the building's perimeter are permitted to be increased by 25 percent in area and one tier in height. Garages with sides open around the entire building's perimeter are permitted to be increased by 50 percent in area and one tier in height. For a side to be considered open under these provisions, the total area of openings along the side shall be not less than 50 percent of the interior area of the side at each tier and such openings shall be equally distributed along the length of the tier. For purposes of calculating the interior area of the side, the height shall not exceed 2.15 m.

Allowable tier areas in Table 406.5.4 shall be increased for open parking garages constructed to heights less than the table maximum. The gross tier area of the garage shall not exceed that permitted for the higher structure. Not fewer than three sides of each such larger tier shall have continuous horizontal openings not less than 750 mm in clear height extending for not less than 80 percent of the length of the sides. All parts of such larger tier shall be not more than 60 m horizontally from such an opening. In addition, each such opening shall face a street or yard with access to a street with a width of not less than 9 m for the full length of the opening, and standpipes shall be provided in each such tier. Open parking garages of Type II construction, with all sides open, shall be unlimited in allowable area where the building height does not exceed 23 m. For a side to be considered open, the total area of openings along the side shall be not less than 50 percent of the interior area of the side at each tier and such openings shall be equally distributed along the length of the tier. For purposes of calculating the interior area of the side, the height shall not exceed

===== Page 0298 =====
2.15m. All portions of tiers shall be within 6 m horizontally from such openings or other natural ventilation openings as defined in Section 406.5.2. These openings shall be permitted to be provided in courts with a minimum dimension of 60 m for the full width of the openings.

The area modifications permitted by Section 406.5.5 for open building perimeters, which are similar to Section 506.3, are also applicable to the area restrictions in Table 406.5.4.

Open parking garages of Type IA construction are unlimited in area and height. This is consistent with Type I construction in Tables 504.3, 504.4 and 506.2.

Open parking garages of Type IB construction are also unlimited in area but are limited in height to 12 tiers (or 18 tiers for a mechanical-access garage that is sprinkler protected). Where a Type IB garage meets either of the open perimeter criteria that follows, it can be one tier higher than allowed in the table.

Where the building is of Type II or IV construction and 75 percent of the perimeter is open, it is permitted to be increased 25 percent in area per tier [or from 4600 m² to 5750 m²] and one tier in height above the limits for the type of construction in Table 406.5.4.

Where the building is of Type II or IV construction and is open for the entire perimeter, a 50-percent increase in area is permitted, as well as one tier in height. This results in the same number of tiers as the 75-percent open perimeter, but in this case the area of each tier can be as large as 7000 m². In addition to complying with the opening criteria found in Section 406.5.2, the openings for an increased area and/or height open parking garage must be at least equal to 50 percent of the interior area of each tier and must be at least 750 mm in vertical dimension. They must be found on 80 percent of the perimeter sides considered open and each such opening shall front on a yard or public way with a minimum dimension of 9 m. Each part of enlarged tiers needs to be within 60 m of such openings.

For Type II garages, there is another design option. Where all sides are open, the area per tier is unlimited provided the building height does not exceed 23 m above grade plane. As in the other options, the openings must be at least 50 percent of the interior of each tier, but in this case the openings must be evenly distributed around the perimeter. All portions of each tier must be within 60 m of such openings, and, where necessary, some of the openings needed for this ventilation may be located in courts, provided the courts have a least dimension of 6 m.
When calculating the interior area of the side of a tier, the maximum height to be used in the calculation is 2150 mm as shown in Commentary Figure 406.5.2. This method allows for consistent application of the provision regardless of the wall height.

406.5.6 Fire separation distance. Exterior walls and openings in exterior walls shall comply with Table 601 and Table 705.5. The distance to an adjacent lot line shall be determined in accordance with Section 705 and Table 705.5.

The required fire separation is intended to provide sufficient open space adjacent to the exterior wall openings to allow for free ventilation and to reduce the probability for fire spread to adjacent structures. The exterior wall openings in an open parking garage are not subject to the opening limitations with a fire separation distance greater than 3 m (see Table 705.8, Note g).

406.5.7 Means of egress. Where persons other than parking attendants are permitted, open parking garages shall meet the means of egress requirements of Chapter 10. Where persons other than parking attendants are not permitted, there shall be not fewer than two exit stairways. Each exit stairway shall be not less than 900 mm in width. Lifts shall be permitted to be installed for use of employees only, provided that they are completely enclosed by noncombustible materials.

Typical means of egress elements are required for open parking garages based on a design occupant load of one person per 19 m² of gross floor area (see Table 1004.5). For mechanical-access open parking garages or for attendant-only ramp-access parking garages, the code would permit two exit stairs, each 900 mm wide.

406.5.8 Standpipe system. An open parking garage shall be equipped with a standpipe system as required by Section 905.3.

Depending on the height of an open parking garage, Section 905.3.1 may require a standpipe system to be provided. The standpipe system would aid the fire department in on-site fire-fighting operations, since Table 406.5.4 permits buildings that may not allow for conventional hoses and apparatus to be carried from ground operations to the fire floor.

406.5.9 Enclosure of vertical openings. Enclosure shall not be required for vertical openings except as specified in Section 406.5.7.

Based on the use of open parking garages requiring convenient and frequent access between floor levels, enclosure of most vertical openings is not required or desired due to the opening requirements of Section 406.5.2. This would include the exit access stairways as

===== Page 0299 =====
permitted by Section 1019.3, Exception 6. Where a designer chooses to provide an enclosure, such as around an elevator hoistway, and the enclosure does not need to be rated, there is no requirement that a lobby be provided for the elevator.

406.5.10 Ventilation. Ventilation, other than the percentage of openings specified in Section 406.5.2, shall not be required.

Mechanical ventilation systems are not required in a structure that is inherently open to the exterior atmosphere.

406.5.11 Prohibitions. The following uses and alterations are not permitted:

1 Vehicle repair work.

2 Parking of buses, trucks and similar vehicles.

3 Partial or complete closing of required openings in exterior walls by tarpaulins or any other means.

4 Dispensing of fuel.

This section reinforces the concepts and requirements of Section 406.5.2 and the definition of “Open parking garage.” Any other use or alteration of an open parking garage, which is designed to take advantage of the increased heights and areas, is specifically prohibited.

406.6 Enclosed parking garages. Enclosed parking garages shall comply with Sections 406.2, 406.4, and 406.6.

Enclosed parking garages are considered to be storage occupancies. In addition to the provisions of Sections 406.2, 406.4 and 406.6, enclosed parking garages must also comply with the code provisions for Group S-2 low-hazard storage occupancies.

The overall building fire load in enclosed parking garages is typically low because the considerable amount of metal in vehicles absorbs heat and the average weight of combustibles per square meter is relatively low (Approximately 10 kg/m \( ^{2} \) ). Still, a vehicle fire may be quite extensive.

406.6.1 Heights and areas. Enclosed vehicle parking garages and portions thereof that do not meet the definition of open parking garages shall be limited to the allowable heights and areas specified in Sections 504 and 506 as modified by Section 507. Roof parking is permitted.

Special height and area limitations allowed for open parking garages in Table 406.5.4 are not provided for enclosed parking garages. The typical allowable building heights and areas of Chapter 5 are to be used for these Group S-2 structures. It should be noted that Section 510 also contains special provisions for enclosed parking garages located beneath other groups and occupancies. See that section for further discussion of these special building arrangements.

406.6.2 Ventilation. A mechanical ventilation system and exhaust system shall be provided in accordance with Chapters 4 and 5 of SBC 501.

Exception: Mechanical ventilation shall not be required for enclosed parking garages that are accessory to one- and two-family dwellings.

Enclosed parking garages are required to be ventilated and exhausted in accordance with the provisions of SBC 501. Where motor vehicles will be operated for a period of time exceeding 10 seconds, the ventilation return air system must be exhausted (see Section 404 of SBC 501).

The exception nearly states a redundancy: parking garages accessory to one- and two-family dwellings are most likely to meet the definition of "Private garage." As such, they are regulated by Section 406.3, which has no ventilation or exhaust requirements. Occasionally a private collector of vintage automobiles or trucks will have a large garage associated with their home. In the rare instance that a garage accessory to a one- or two-family dwelling is classified as an enclosed public garage, waiving the ventilation and exhaust requirements of this section is consistent with Section 406.3.

406.6.3 Automatic sprinkler system. An enclosed parking garage shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.10.

A building containing a Group S-2 enclosed parking garage is required to be sprinkled throughout where the fire area of the garage exceeds 1100 m² or where the garage is located under occupancies other than Group R-3. Note that although not discussed in the open parking garage requirements within Section 406, open parking garages with a fire area exceeding 4460 m² are required to be provided with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.10 unless meeting the requirements in Section 507.3 for single-story buildings. A full discussion is provided in the commentary to Sections 507.3 and 903.2.10.

406.6.4 Mechanical-access enclosed parking garages. Mechanical-access enclosed parking garages shall be in accordance with Sections 406.6.4.1 through 406.6.4.4.

This section provides prescriptive requirements for protecting this type of enclosed rack-storage-type parking garage, where there are typically no above-grade floors or access, exit stairways, or occupants other

===== Page 0300 =====
than what is needed for maintenance purposes. Fire fighters face many challenges with this type of structure. The general requirements are similar to high-piled rack and automated storage requirements in Chapter 32 of SBC 801.

406.6.4.1 Separation. Mechanical-access enclosed parking garages shall be separated from other occupancies and accessory uses by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or by not less than 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

This is a specific requirement for a 2-hour occupancy separation from a mechanical-access enclosed parking garage if a fire were to occur in the occupancy, partitioning is needed to protect adjoining occupancies and other uses until the fire can be contained by the sprinkler system and mechanical ventilation.

406.6.4.2 Smoke removal. A mechanical smoke removal system, installed in accordance with Section 910.4, shall be provided for all areas containing a mechanical-access enclosed parking garage.

This type of parking garage is basically high-piled storage in an enclosed box with no floors or standpipes for elevated firefighting. A mechanical smoke removal system is necessary to remove the products of combustion, heat and super-heated gases that could occur in large amounts.

406.6.4.3 Fire control equipment room. Fire control equipment, consisting of the fire alarm control unit, mechanical ventilation controls and an emergency shutdown switch, shall be provided in a room located where the equipment is able to be accessed by the fire service from a secured exterior door of the building. The room shall be not less than  \( 4.65 \, m^2 \)  in area and shall be in a location that is approved by the fire code official.

The fire control equipment room will provide fire fighters with safe access to fire control equipment and systems. This is not the same as a fire command center required for high-rise buildings.

406.6.4.3.1 Emergency shutdown switch. The mechanical parking system shall be provided with a manually activated emergency shutdown switch for use by emergency personnel. The switch shall be clearly identified and shall be in a location approved by the fire code official.

The required manual emergency shutdown switch will be located as determined by the fire code official to best suit the needs of emergency personnel.
406.6.4.4 Fire department access doors. Access doors shall be provided in accordance with Section 3206.7 of SBC 801.

Fire department access door requirements are determined for mechanical-access enclosed parking garages in the same manner as they are for other high-piled storage areas (see Section 3206.7 of SBC 801).

406.7 Motor fuel-dispensing facilities. Motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall comply with SBC 801 and Sections 406.2 and 406.7.

Motor fuel-dispensing facilities are those areas where motor fuels are stored, sold or otherwise dispensed to vehicles. These buildings and structures are classified as Group M motor fuel-dispensing facilities. They must be constructed in accordance with the applicable requirements of Chapter 23 of SBC 801. Specific details are provided for the special hazards relative to fuel-dispensing systems and areas.

406.7.1 Vehicle fueling pad. The vehicle shall be fueled on noncoated concrete or other approved paving material having a resistance not exceeding 1 megaohm as determined by the methodology in CEN EN 1081.

The use of hydrogen as a vehicle fuel necessitates that the code clearly address the hazard of potential electrostatic discharge around fueling facilities. The preferred material for fueling pads is concrete, but the referenced standard provides alternative materials to achieve an antistatic performance of the pad.

406.7.2 Canopies. Canopies under which fuels are dispensed shall have a clear, unobstructed height of not less than 4150 mm to the lowest projecting element in the vehicle drive-through area. Canopies and their supports over pumps shall be of noncombustible materials, fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Chapter 23, heavy timber complying with Section 2304.11 or construction providing 1 hour fire resistance. Combustible materials used in or on a canopy shall comply with one of the following:

1 Shielded from the pumps by a noncombustible element of the canopy, or heavy timber complying with Section 2304.11.

2 Plastics covered by aluminum facing having a thickness of not less than 0.30 mm or corrosion resistant steel having a base metal thickness of not less than 0.40 mm. The plastic shall have a flame spread index of 25 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in the form intended for use in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 and a self-ignition temperature of  \( 343^{\circ} \) C.

===== Page 0301 =====
or greater when tested in accordance with ASTM D1929.

3 Panels constructed of light-transmitting plastic materials shall be permitted to be installed in canopies erected over motor vehicle fuel-dispensing station fuel dispensers, provided that the panels are located not less than 3 m from any building on the same lot and face yards or streets not less than 12 m in width on the other sides. The aggregate areas of plastics shall be not greater than 100 m². The maximum area of any individual panel shall be not greater than 10 m².

Almost all motor fuel-dispensing facilities are provided with a flat canopy-style roof structure that is column supported. Obviously these structures must be designed to meet the applicable wind loads of Chapter 16. For fire safety purposes, the canopies must pose little fire risk and be located above any immediate fire hazards from the fuel-dispensing areas. Limitations are provided for all combustible materials used in the canopy construction.

406.7.2.1 Canopies used to support gaseous hydrogen systems. Canopies that are used to shelter dispensing operations where flammable compressed gases are located on the roof of the canopy shall be in accordance with the following:

1 The canopy shall meet or exceed Type I construction requirements.

2 Operations located under canopies shall be limited to refueling only.

3 The canopy shall be constructed in a manner that prevents the accumulation of hydrogen gas.

This provision is part of the overall package of code requirements related to gaseous hydrogen fuel. These additional requirements are necessary to abate the inherent hazards while permitting the use of weather shelters. Not only must the canopies be of noncombustible materials, but they must also have the fire-resistance ratings specified in Table 601 for either Type IA or IB construction.

406.8 Repair garages. Repair garages shall be constructed in accordance with SBC 801 and Sections 406.2 and 406.8. This occupancy shall not include motor fuel-dispensing facilities, as regulated in Section 406.7.

Repair garages are those in which provisions are made for the care, repair and painting of vehicles. Repair garages have an inherently higher fire hazard represented by numerous vehicles in some state of repair, with possible spray painting. As such, these buildings or structures are classified as Group S-1. Repair garages must be in compliance with Sections 406.2 and 406.8. Where paint spraying is included in the provided services, Section 416 is applicable. Finally, repair garages are subject to the applicable requirements of Chapter 23 of SBC 801.

All work that involves repairs or reconstruction of damaged or nonfunctioning vehicles is considered a higher hazard. These types of facilities provide a variety of services, including tune-ups, oil changes, engine or transmission overhauls, and body work, and are all considered as repair garages. Additional protection and detection systems are required to match the increased hazards.

406.8.1 Ventilation. Repair garages shall be mechanically ventilated in accordance with SBC 501. The ventilation system shall be controlled at the entrance to the garage.

Repair garages are required to be ventilated in accordance with the provisions of SBC 501. where motor vehicles will be operated for a period of time exceeding 10 seconds, the ventilation return air for the repair garage ventilation system must be exhausted (see Sections 403 and 404 of SBC 501).

406.8.2 Gas detection system. Repair garages used for repair of vehicles fueled by nonodorized gases including but not limited to hydrogen and nonodorized LNG, shall be provided with a gas detection system that complies with Section 916. The gas detection system shall be designed to detect leakage of nonodorized gaseous fuel. Where lubrication or chassis service pits are provided in garages used for repairing nonodorized LNG-fueled vehicles, gas sensors shall be provided in such pits.

Some gases contain additives, such as ethyl mercaptan, that produce pungent odors for easy sensory detection and recognition. Where a repair garage repairs vehicles equipped with fuel systems that do not use these odorized gases, a gas detection system must be installed to replace the lost sensory detection capability.

406.8.2.1 System activation. Activation of a gas detection alarm shall result in all of the following:

1 Initiation of distinct audible and visual alarm signals in the repair garage, where the ventilation system is interlocked with gas detection.

2 Deactivation of all heating systems located in the repair garage.

3 Activation of the mechanical ventilation system, where the system is interlocked with gas detection.

When the flammable gas detection system identifies a gas level or levels exceeding those

===== Page 0302 =====
set for each installation, it must do three things: alert the occupants of the emergency, cut power to all possible ignition sources and dilute the concentration level with additional ventilation air.

The gas detector or gas sensor is a critical part of the system for the detection of the different gases. The correct sensor must be selected and installed in approved locations as prescribed by the manufacturer's instructions. Section 916 provides detailed requirements for gas detection systems.

406.8.2.2 Failure of the gas detection system. Failure of the gas detection system shall automatically deactivate the heating system, activate the mechanical ventilation system where the system is interlocked with the gas detection system, and cause a trouble signal to sound at an approved location.

The gas detection system must include a default mode of operation. If the system malfunctions or loses power, it must in effect do the same operational requirements referenced in Section 406.8.2.1. This redundancy will lessen the likelihood of an explosive fire risk for the specialized motor fuels.

406.8.3 Automatic sprinkler system. A repair garage shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.9.1.

Buildings where repair garages are located are to be provided with an automatic sprinkler system where any one of four listed conditions specified in Section 903.2.9.1 is present. The threshold for where sprinklers are required is lower for those repair garages where work is performed on trucks or buses. See the commentary to Section 903.2.9.1 for further information.

## SECTION 407 GROUP I-2

407.1 General. Occupancies in Group I-2 shall comply with the provisions of Sections 407.1 through 407.11 and other applicable provisions of this code.

The provisions contained in Section 407 reflect requirements of previous model codes, full-scale fire tests and historical fire experience. Features unique to health care facilities, such as a low fuel load, the presence of staff, operating practices and procedures and the regulatory process, were also included in developing the provisions. One of the concerns addressed by this section is the need to provide an acceptable level of protection without interfering with the operation of the facility. To that end, various provisions of Section 407 are designed to soften the rigid barrier between rooms and corridors. For example, Section 407.2.5 allows a nursing home housing unit to be open to the corridor under certain conditions. Such designs allow nursing homes to be a little less institutional while still providing a safe environment for the residents and staff of the home.

Group I-2 has been divided into two conditions (see Section 308.3). Group I-2, Condition 1 occupies are primarily nursing homes where both nursing and medical care is provided, but services such as surgery, obstetrics and emergency care are not provided. Care recipients in a Group I-2, Condition 1 facility are usually staying for long periods. Group I-2, Condition 2 occupies are primarily hospitals that provide a wide range of medical treatment and services. Care recipients generally stay over a night or two, but stays are generally short term. See also the definitions in Chapter 2 of the terms "24-hour basis," "Custodial care," "Medical care" and "Personal care service."

Underlying the protection requirements for Group I-2 is a “defend-in-place” philosophy based on the difficulties associated with evacuating such facilities.

The first level of protection established is the individual room (typically a patient sleeping room). Horizontal evacuation to an adjacent smoke compartment provides the second level of protection. Where necessary, the third level of protection involves evacuation of the floor or entire building.

This section has been created not only because of considerations unique to health care facilities, but also to facilitate the consideration of the entire package of protection features. The basic protection features include early detection, fire containment, horizontal evacuation and fire extinguishment. Additionally, Chapter 4 of SBC 801 contains criteria for emergency planning and preparedness.

As previously noted, the provisions of this section are based in part on there being a relatively low fuel load. Certain areas within Group I-2, however, will have a higher concentration of combustibles. These areas, as well as other areas that represent a specific hazard within Group I-2, are addressed in Section 509 as incidental uses. Because of the nature of the activity, the incidental use area is required to be protected with an automatic sprinkler system, separated with a fire barrier and horizontal assembly, or both (see Table 509.1).

The provisions of Section 407 apply to both Group I-2 conditions unless the section specifically refers to one or the other. The requirements of Section 407 are intended to be

===== Page 0303 =====
additional special use and occupancy provisions for facilities that provide medical care for more than five persons for longer than 24 hours. For medical care outside of a Group I occupancy, please also see Section 422 for ambulatory care facilities. Other requirements for Group I-2 occupancies are provided throughout the code.

407.2 Corridors continuity and separation. Corridors in occupancies in Group I-2 shall be continuous to the exits and shall be separated from other areas in accordance with Section 407.3 except spaces conforming to Sections 407.2.1 through 407.2.6.

Since the occupants of areas classified as Group I-2 may be incapable of self-preservation, the means of egress serving such areas must facilitate the evacuation of such persons, as well as other people with mobility impairments. Accordingly, corridors serving Group I-2 occupancies are required to be continuous to the exits and, except as provided for in Sections 407.2.1 through 407.2.6, separated from other use areas. As such, corridors in Group I-2 occupancies are intended to provide a protected path of travel that, once entered, leads directly and continuously to the exits (see also commentary, Sections 407.4.1 and 1020.7). Note that a door through a horizontal exit constructed with a fire barrier or fire wall would constitute an exit (see Section 1026); however, moving through a smoke barrier into another smoke compartment is not a horizontal exit and therefore corridor continuity must be maintained on both sides of the smoke barrier. To address the various operational requirements of occupancies classified as Group I-2, the code includes provisions that both permit various areas to be open to corridors and address care suite arrangements for the exit access portions of the facilities. Standards for areas open to corridors are covered primarily in this section. The design of care suites is regulated by provisions found in Section 407.4.4.

For the ease of operations of Group I-2 occupancies, it is often desirable to have certain areas open to exit access corridors. Recognizing these needs and that these occupancies are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system, the code permits specific areas to be open to corridors, provided they are properly arranged and equipped with compensating protection features (e.g., automatic fire detection). Sections 407.2.1 through 407.2.6 identify those areas and the protection features required to maintain the safety of the corridor.
In addition to practical reasons, such as in the case of care providers' stations, it is also desirable to designate certain areas being open to the corridor for treatment purposes. In many instances, the care recipient is encouraged to leave the sleeping room for both physical as well as social benefit. So that care recipients can be encouraged to socialize and benefit from group activities and social interaction, the areas need to be open to the corridor.

Waiting areas and other areas open to the corridor also serve a useful purpose during a fire emergency. If evacuation becomes necessary, care recipients usually will be relocated to an adjacent smoke compartment in which the areas open to the corridor will serve as a refuge area. Section 407.5.1 contains provisions for the net area that must be available for the relocation of care recipients. Waiting areas and similar spaces provide a space in which care recipients can be relocated such that treatment can continue during a fire emergency.

407.2.1 Waiting and similar areas. Waiting areas, public-use areas, or group meeting spaces constructed as required for corridors shall be permitted to be open to a corridor, only where all of the following criteria are met:

1 The spaces are not occupied as care recipient's sleeping rooms, treatment rooms, incidental uses in accordance with Section 509, or hazardous uses.

2 The open space is protected by an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907.

3 The corridors onto which the spaces open, in the same smoke compartment, are protected by an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907, or the smoke compartment in which the spaces are located is equipped throughout with quick-response sprinklers in accordance with Section 903.3.2.

4 The space is arranged so as not to obstruct access to the required exits.

In the design of health care facilities, it is desirable to have waiting areas and similar spaces open to the corridor. Such seating areas or gathering spaces provide care recipients and others a place to sit outside of the sleeping rooms for social interaction, or to wait near special care areas for their turn in a treatment room. In consideration of the additional protection features specified, small waiting areas and similar spaces are permitted to be open to corridors in Group I-2 occupancies within each smoke compartment.

===== Page 0304 =====
provided they are constructed to the corridor standards for Group I-2 occupancies, as specified in Section 407.3.

Care recipient sleeping rooms, treatment rooms, and hazardous and incidental use areas cannot be open to the corridors under this section. Under Section 508, all Group H hazardous occupancies must be separated from other occupancies; therefore, it follows that such cannot be open to the corridors in Group I-2 facilities.

While Item 1 restricts treatment facilities in general from being open to the corridor, Section 407.2.3 specifically allows treatment areas for psychiatric wards to be open to the corridor. Further, the broad restriction that sleeping rooms not be open to the corridor is relaxed under Section 407.2.5, which relaxes the relationship between nursing home housing units and the corridors. Areas similar to waiting rooms could include common visiting areas, reception or information stations and care recipient check-in stations. General hospital office areas or support spaces beyond those associated with waiting or reception areas must be separated from the corridor (see Commentary Figure 407.2.1 unless permitted by other subsections.

To reduce the likelihood that a fire within such an open space could develop beyond the incipient stage, thereby jeopardizing the integrity of the corridor, the area is to be equipped with an automatic fire detection system (see Section 907). The detectors are to be located to provide the appropriate coverage to the space.

There is no size limit set by the code for these spaces. Due to the unlimited size of the space and, consequently, the potential for a significant number of people in the area, an automatic fire detection system is also required in all corridors open to the spaces within the smoke compartment, or the smoke compartment in which such spaces are located must be protected throughout with quick-response sprinklers.

Waiting areas and similar spaces open to corridors must be arranged so as to not obstruct access to exits. There must be a clear path of travel of the minimum required width for the corridor, which should be maintained at all times. As such, furniture layouts must be arranged in a manner that obstruction of the exits does not occur under normal use.

407.2.2 Care providers' stations. Spaces for care providers', supervisory staff, doctors' and nurses' charting, communications and related clerical areas shall be permitted to be open to the corridor, where such spaces are constructed as required for corridors.
* Stations for care providers need to be located to provide quick access to care recipients and to permit visual or audible monitoring of the sleeping rooms. For these and other practical reasons, care providers' stations are permitted to be open to the corridor, provided the walls surrounding the area are constructed as required for corridor walls (see Commentary Figure 407.2.2). Except as required in Section 407.9, the additional protection of automatic fire detection is not required because of the reduced risk to life safety and attendance by the staff (see Section 407.9). This section is not intended to apply to nurses' offices, administrative supply storage areas, drug distribution stations or similar areas with a higher fuel load and from which continual observation of the nursing unit is not essential.

407.2.3 Psychiatric treatment areas. Areas wherein psychiatric care recipients who are incapable of self-preservation are housed, or group meeting or multipurpose therapeutic spaces other than incidental uses in accordance with Section 509, under continuous supervision by facility staff, shall be permitted to be open to the corridor, where the following criteria are met:

1 Each area does not exceed  \( 140 \, m^{2} \) .

2 The area is located to permit supervision by the facility staff.

3 The area is arranged so as not to obstruct any access to the required exits.

4 The area is equipped with an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907.2.

5 Not more than one such space is permitted in any one smoke compartment.

6 The walls and ceilings of the space are constructed as required for corridors.

This section applies to all areas that house psychiatric care recipients who are not physically capable of self-preservation because the area is secured (see Section 1010.1.9.7).

To encourage care recipients of psychiatric facilities to participate in group meetings and therapeutic activities, treatment areas may be open to the corridor, provided that the area does not exceed  \( 140 \, m^{2} \)  and only one such area is provided within a smoke compartment. Other protection features that must be provided to permit the area to be open include: staff supervision, unobstructed access to exits and automatic fire detection in accordance with Section 907.2 within the area. The group meeting room, while not separated from the corridor, must be separated from other areas of the unit with construction as required for a corridor.

===== Page 0305 =====
407.2.4 Gift shops. Gift shops and associated storage that are less than  \( 46 \, m^{2} \)  in area shall be permitted to be open to the corridor where such spaces are constructed as required for corridors.

Gift shops are not permitted to be open to a corridor in occupancies classified as Group I-2 unless they are less than  \( 46 \, m^{2} \)  in area (see Commentary Figure 407.2.1). The section allows any associated storage to be included in the  \( 46 \, m^{2} \)  limitation since the associated fire hazard in both areas would be the same, where the gift shop and associated storage are greater than  \( 46 \, m^{2} \)  combined, but the gift shop itself was less than  \( 46 \, m^{2} \) , an option would be to leave the gift shop open to the corridor and separate the storage from the gift shop and other areas with construction as required for corridors.

407.2.5 Nursing home housing units. In Group I-2, Condition 1, occupancies, in areas where nursing home residents are housed, shared living spaces, group meeting or multipurpose therapeutic spaces shall be permitted to be open to the corridor, where all of the following criteria are met:

1 The walls and ceilings of the space are constructed as required for corridors.

2 The spaces are not occupied as resident sleeping rooms, treatment rooms, incidental uses in accordance with Section 509, or hazardous uses.

3 The open space is protected by an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907.

4 The corridors onto which the spaces open, in the same smoke compartment, are protected by an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907, or the smoke compartment in which the spaces are located is equipped throughout with quick-response sprinklers in accordance with Section 903.3.2.

5 The space is arranged so as not to obstruct access to the required exits.

In nursing home occupancies, residents are encouraged to spend time outside of their rooms. Way finding and orientation problems are common in nursing home residents, and research has shown that direct visibility to a desired location is more effective for cuing than signage. Therefore, having a variety of shared living spaces open to the corridor encourages socialization, encourages interaction, and is important to resident well-being. Further, being able to preview activities that are occurring helps to encourage joining and allows reluctant participants to join at their own pace. Finally, a more open plan allows staff to see and monitor residents more easily throughout the course of the day. Commentary Figure 407.2.5 shows examples of typical areas open to a corridor that would be allowed by this provision. The protections used for other areas allowed open to the corridor in other parts of Section 407.2 are repeated here.

407.2.6 Nursing home cooking facilities. In Group I-2, Condition 1, occupancies, rooms or spaces that contain a cooking facility with domestic cooking appliances shall be permitted to be open to the corridor where all of the following criteria are met:

1 The number of care recipients housed in the smoke compartment shall not be greater than 30.

2 The number of care recipients served by the cooking facility shall not be greater than 30.

3 Not more than one cooking facility area shall be permitted in a smoke compartment.

4 The corridor shall be a clearly identified space delineated by construction or floor pattern, material or color.

5 The space containing the domestic cooking facility shall be arranged so as not to obstruct access to the required exit.

6 The cooking appliance shall comply with Section 407.2.7.

As nursing homes move away from institutional models, it is critical to have a functioning kitchen that can serve as the hearth of the home. Instead of a large, centralized, institutional kitchen where all meals are prepared and delivered to a central dining room or the resident's room, the new "household model" nursing home uses de-centralized kitchens and small dining areas to create the feeling and focus of home. For persons with dementia, it is particularly important to have spaces that look familiar, like the kitchen in their former home, to increase their understanding and ability to function at their highest level.

Allowing kitchens that serve a small, defined group of residents to be open to common spaces and, in some instances, corridors, is critically important to enhancing the feeling and memories of home for older adults. This allows residents to see and smell the food being prepared, which can enhance their appetites and evoke positive memories. Some residents, based on their abilities and cognition level, may even be able to participate in food preparation activities such as stirring, measuring ingredients, peeling vegetables, or folding towels. This becomes a social activity, where they can easily converse with the staff member cooking, as well as a way for the resident to

===== Page 0306 =====
maintain their functional abilities and to feel that they are still an important, contributing member of society. Commentary Figure 407.2.6(1) provides a picture of an open kitchen area. Commentary Figure 407.2.6(2) provides an example floor plan of a nursing home housing unit with an open kitchen.

It is recognized that unattended cooking is a leading cause of fires. Therefore, the provisions of this section are aimed at limiting the potential of such fires and, in the event of such a fire, to limit the area affected by the fire. Limiting the number of care recipients being served by the kitchen reduces the amount of meals prepared, which also reduces the level of risk. A building may contain multiple cooking facilities, but not more than one cooking facility can be in a single smoke compartment and each cooking facility may not serve more than 30 care recipients.

Additional safeguards are described in Section 407.2.7. These include a shutoff for the fuel and electrical supply, a timer that deactivates the cooking appliance and providing fire extinguishers. The shutoff is accessible only by staff and limits the use of these kitchens to when the staff is aware of the activity and authorizes it by turning on the fuel sources. In addition to these safeguards, all new nursing homes are fully protected with an automatic sprinkler system. Fire studies performed by NIST have proven that a single quick-response sprinkler head can effectively contain and extinguish a cooking oil fire.

While spaces open to the corridors are required to have an automatic smoke detection system per Section 907, to prevent false alarms it is recommended that smoke detectors be located a minimum of 6 m from a cooking appliance.

407.2.7 Domestic cooking appliances. In Group I-2 occupancies, installation of cooking appliances used in domestic cooking facilities shall comply with all of the following:

1 The types of cooking appliances permitted shall be limited to ovens, cooktops, ranges, warmers and microwaves.

2 Domestic cooking hoods installed and constructed in accordance with Section 505 of SBC 501 shall be provided over cooktops and ranges.

3 Cooktops and ranges shall be protected in accordance with Section 904.14.

4 A shut-off for the fuel and electrical power supply to the cooking equipment shall be provided in a location to which only staff has access.
5 A timer shall be provided that automatically deactivates the cooking appliances within a period of not more than 120 minutes.

6 A portable fire extinguisher shall be provided. Installation shall be in accordance with Section 906, and the extinguisher shall be located within a 9 m distance of travel from each domestic cooking appliance.

## Exceptions:

1. Cooktops and ranges located within smoke compartments with no patient sleeping or patient care areas are not required to comply with this section.

2. Cooktops and ranges used for care recipient training or nutritional counseling are not required to comply with Item 3 of this section.

These safety measures, when combined with cooking for a maximum of 30 care recipients in each cooking facility (as described in 407.2.6) and standard safety aspects of Group I-2 occupancies such as sprinklers, trained staff and smoke compartments, help reduce the level of risk to an acceptable level while providing a real social and emotional benefit to care recipients.

The appliances that are permitted to be in a nursing home cooking facility are electric or gas ranges, cooktops, stoves, ovens, warmers and microwaves. This can also include toasters and toaster ovens as they fall into the warmer or oven category. Deep-fat fryers, charcoal grills, wood-burning ovens or commercial cooking appliances are not permitted in domestic cooking facilities. Only the cooktops and ranges are required to have a domestic cooking hood. Section 904.14 requires either: a fire-extinguishing system, listed and labeled to UL 300A, to be built into the range hood; or a listed sensor in the burner to shut off upon high-heat detection, thereby preventing ignition of a cooking fire. The built-in fire-extinguishing system in the hood also provides for a manual actuation of the extinguishers and an interlock that shuts down the power or fuel source to the appliance upon actuation of the extinguisher heads.

The cooktop or range must have a shutoff switch that deactivates the appliance and is accessible only to staff. This may be a switch inside a locked cabinet, a keyed switch or an electronic switch with passcode or similar security. It may be located on the wall near the appliance, in a kitchen cabinet or inside the pantry or other room. The intent is that the cooktop or range is only able to be used when staff are aware that it is being used or if staff is able to supervise. Similarly, a timer is required

===== Page 0307 =====
to deactivate the cooktop, range or oven after 120 minutes in case a staff member was distracted by, or tending to, an urgent care situation. The timer should be able to be reset by the staff member, as needed, when cooking something that requires a cooking time of longer than 120 minutes. A portable fire extinguisher must be located within 9 m of each cooking appliance. The intent is that it a staff member can quickly reach it in the event of an emergency. Ideally, it would be located in the same room as the cooking appliance but can be located outside the room as long as the travel distance does not exceed 9 m. A best practice would be that this a Class K fire extinguisher.

Exception 1: Cooktops and ranges used for limited cooking, outside of care-recipient sleeping smoke compartments, don't have the volume of cooking activities as those described in Section 407.2.7 or a commercial cooking facility. Examples of these limited cooking arrangements include employee break rooms in the business area of a hospital and activity rooms that may be used for baking cookies or similar activity or therapeutic cooking. In these limited cooking scenarios, the additional safeguards of upgraded hoods, shutoffs and timers are not justified. The space containing these cooktops and ranges would still need to comply with SBC 501 for ventilation of domestic equipment.

Exception 2: Cooktops and ranges are often used for occupational therapy where staff is helping care recipients learn how to safely cook for themselves after an injury or surgery. Staff also teach care recipients how to make healthier meals to address conditions such as heart disease or diabetes. In this instance, safeguards such as shutoff switches and fire extinguishers are prudent, but the upgraded hood is not needed. The space containing these cooktops and ranges would still need to comply with SBC 501 for ventilation of domestic equipment.

407.3 Corridor wall construction. Corridor walls shall be constructed as smoke partitions in accordance with Section 710.

Corridor walls are required to form a barrier to limit smoke transfer from separate areas containing combustible materials that could produce smoke and to provide adequate separation of the care recipient sleeping rooms. In a building protected throughout with an automatic sprinkler system, the probability that a fire will develop that is life threatening to persons outside the room of origin is reduced; therefore, corridor walls need only be able to resist the passage of smoke.

The corridor wall is not required to have a fire resistance rating (Section 710.3), but the wall is to terminate at the underside of the floor or roof deck above or to the underside of the ceiling membrane if it is capable of resisting the passage of smoke (Section 710.4). The walls must be of materials consistent with the building's type of construction classification.

Note that the provisions of Section 509 must be considered in determining the fire-resistance rating of any corridor walls that also enclose incidental uses where fire barriers are required (Section 509.4.1) or construction capable of resisting the passage of smoke (Section 509.4.2). Note that construction capable of resisting the passage of smoke does not have all the same requirements as smoke partitions as required in Section 710 (see Commentary Figure 407.3).

407.3.1 Corridor doors. Corridor doors, other than those in a wall required to be rated by Section 509.4 or for the enclosure of a vertical opening or an exit, shall not have a required fire protection rating and shall not be required to be equipped with self-closing or automatic-closing devices, but shall provide an effective barrier to limit the transfer of smoke and shall be equipped with positive latching. Roller latches are not permitted. Other doors shall conform to Section 716.

As with corridor wall construction (see commentary, Section 407.3), the door assemblies need only be capable of resisting the passage of smoke. Corridor doors in occupancies classified as Group I-2 are not required to be self-closing or automatic-closing except where required by other sections, such as for doors serving incidental uses as required in Section 509, or doors in shaft walls that enclose a vertical opening or exit stairway or ramp. This provision is primarily intended to apply to care recipient sleeping room corridor doors. Doors in walls that separate incidental uses in accordance with Section 509 are required to be self-closing to minimize the possibility that corridors will be affected by a fire originating in those adjacent areas. Self-closing or automatic-closing doors in the shaft walls of vertical openings and exit stairways and ramps are still required to avoid a breech in vertical opening protection that would enable rapid fire spread from story to story and for adequate protection of the exits. It is important to recognize that this section contains a specific set of requirements for the corridor doors in this occupancy and that the provisions of this section must be followed versus the provisions of Section 710.5.2 for doors in smoke partitions (see code and commentary, Section 102.1). Full-scale fire tests and historical experience indicate that the automatic sprinkler system will provide

===== Page 0308 =====
adequate protection to persons outside of the room of origin. It is also expected that staff will be adequately trained and will close the doors to care recipient sleeping rooms within the affected areas, or will evacuate patients to an adjacent smoke compartment. The presence of the automatic sprinkler system, particularly one equipped with quick-response heads, increases the probability that staff will be able to close the door to the room of origin and thereby limit the size of the fire. Roller latches are not permitted on these doors, as they are not regarded as providing positive latching that will allow the door to act as a reliable smoke protective.

407.3.1.1 Door construction. Doors in corridors not required to have a fire protection rating shall comply with the following:

1 Solid doors shall have close-fitting operational tolerances, head and jamb stops.

2 Dutch-style doors shall have an astragal, rabbit or bevel at the meeting edges of the upper and lower door sections. Both the upper and lower door sections shall have latching hardware. Dutch-style doors shall have hardware that connects the upper and lower sections to function as a single leaf.

3 To provide makeup air for exhaust systems in accordance with Section 1020.6, Exception 1, doors are permitted to have louver or to have a clearance between the bottom of the door and the floor surface that is 19 mm maximum.

A variety of different door types exist in Group I-2 occupancies. Some spaces use Dutch-style doors for areas such as satellite pharmacies or therapy areas. This allows for the top portion of the door to be open to allow for staff observation or interaction while the bottom remains closed to prevent residents and visitors from freely walking into the room. Door louvers or undercuts up to 20 mm are permitted in corridor doors to provide ventilation air and negative pressure for rooms such as toilet rooms, bathrooms and janitor closets.

407.4 Means of egress. Group I-2 occupancies shall be provided with means of egress complying with Chapter 10 and Sections 407.4.1 through 407.4.4. The fire safety and evacuation plans provided in accordance with Section 1002.2 shall identify the building components necessary to support a defend-in-place emergency response in accordance with Sections 404 and 408 of SBC 801.

In addition to required compliance with Chapter 10, Group I-2 occupancies must also comply with special provisions regarding direct access to a corridor (Section 407.4.1), travel distance (Section 407.4.2), projections into corridors (Section 407.4.3) and care suites (Section 407.4.4).

Defend-in-place is a concept that has long been employed as the preferred method of fire response in nursing homes and hospitals due to the fragile nature of the occupants. Occupants in this setting are often dependent on the building infrastructure, active and passive fire protection, and staff training and response since immediate evacuation would place their lives at risk. The infrastructure system typically includes lifesupport systems such as medical gases, emergency power and environmental controls that rely on continued building operation. A combination of active and passive fire protection typically includes fire and smoke detection, fire sprinkler systems, fire and smoke barriers and dampers along with protective openings. Integral to the staff training and response is the fire safety and evacuation plan. Health care facilities typically have a facility-wide plan that describes the overall safety program and details the specific measures for a facility-wide response. In addition to this plan, facilities will also have department- or unit-specific safety plans. These unit-specific plans detail specific actions that will need to be taken to protect the various care recipients, staff and visitors within the area, such as what actions are to be taken immediately—like who is responsible to close what doors and remove allowable equipment from the corridor—where and when to meet to discuss patient needs, and how to prepare for possible horizontal evacuation.

Previous versions of this code and legacy codes have created a tried and tested set of requirements to support the defend-in-place concept, such as smoke compartments and areas of refuge. However, previous codes have not specifically described the concept of occupants remaining within a building during an emergency, which has led to confusion and misapplication during design and enforcement. This section identifies Group I-2 as a location where this type of emergency response is permitted. The codes governing hospitals, nursing homes and other Group I-2 classes are designed to support the defend-in-place use. While the code has been silent on the underlying concept, the defend-in-place strategy has been the commonly accepted practice in these occupancies (see SBC 801 Sections 403 and 404 for additional information on defend-in-place).

407.4.1 Direct access to a corridor. Habitable rooms in Group I-2 occupancies shall have an exit access door leading directly to a corridor.

Exceptions:

===== Page 0309 =====
1. Rooms with exit doors opening directly to the outside at ground level.

2. Rooms arranged as care suites complying with Section 407.4.4.

Direct access to the corridor system from a patient sleeping room or treatment room is a key component to staff access and patient movement. The term "habitable rooms" is not intended to include individual bathrooms, closets and similar spaces, or briefly occupied spaces such as control rooms in radiology and small storage/supply rooms. Habitable areas would include staff areas within the patient treatment and sleeping areas (e.g., nutrition rooms, clean/dirty linen rooms, staff lounge, staff work areas).

The exceptions would allow direct access to the outside rather than needing to go back into the corridor, or access through a portion of a care suite before accessing the corridor.

407.4.1.1 Locking devices. Locking devices that restrict access to a care recipient's room from the corridor and that are operable only by staff from the corridor side shall not restrict the means of egress from the care recipient's room.

## Exceptions:

1. This section shall not apply to rooms in psychiatric treatment and similar care areas.

2. Locking arrangements in accordance with Section 1010.2.14.

Locking devices are permitted on care recipient room doors, provided egress from the care recipient room is not restricted. Such locking devices enable care recipients in long-term care facilities to secure their rooms and staff to secure unoccupied rooms. In such cases, it is expected that the staff still has access, via key or other opening device.

The need to lock corridor doors to restrain care recipients in psychiatric facilities, however, is recognized. Where such locking is necessary, provisions must be made for continuous supervision and prompt release. Additional guidance on locking arrangements, applying to occupancies in Group I-3, can be found in Sections 408.4 and 1010.2.15. A decision needs to be made to determine if the area being considered more closely represents an occupancy in Group I-2 or I-3 (e.g., a holding room in the emergency room of the hospital for care recipients who may be violent). In occupancies in Group I-3, it is generally assumed that the occupants are capable of self-preservation once the doors are unlocked. This may not be the case in some psychiatric facilities and, therefore, the provision applicable to occupancies in Group I-2 may be more appropriate.
Similar protection may also be necessary in certain portions of other occupancies in Group I-2 where the movement of the care recipients must be controlled (e.g., care recipients with Alzheimer's disease). For special locking arrangements for suites or floors where elopement may be an issue, see Section 1010.1.9.7. It is not the intent of this section to prohibit other locking options that will allow free access in accordance with Sections 1010.1.9.8, 1010.1.9.9 and 1010.1.9.10.

407.4.2 Distance of travel. The distance of travel between any point in a Group I-2 occupancy sleeping room, not located in a care suite, and an exit access door in that room shall be not greater than 15 m.

This section limits the overall travel distance within an individual patient sleeping room to the exit access door from that room. This is a separate concept from the travel distance within a care suite (see Section 407.4.4) and must be considered for each patient sleeping room individually.

407.4.3 Projections in nursing home corridors. In Group I-2, Condition 1 occupancies, where the corridor width is not less than 2400 mm, projections shall be permitted for furniture where all of the following criteria are met:

1 The furniture is attached to the floor or to the wall.

2 The furniture does not reduce the clear width of the corridor to less than 1800 mm except where other encroachments are permitted in accordance with Section 1005.7.

3 The furniture is positioned on only one side of the corridor.

4 Each arrangement of furniture is 4.5 m \( ^{2} \)  maximum in area.

5 Furniture arrangements are separated by 3 m minimum.

6 Placement of furniture is considered as part of the fire and safety plans in accordance with Section 1002.2.

Many nursing homes have long corridors that residents must traverse. Residents who are physically unable to traverse the distance without being able to rest periodically have little recourse but to use a wheelchair, an outcome counter to maintaining their ambulatory skills. The provisions of this section are aimed at maintaining the corridor's function by keeping furniture secure in place and only allowing limited installations. The spacing of the furniture also supports the therapeutic use of the furniture by residents moving from one location to another farther down the corridor.

===== Page 0310 =====
407.4.4 Group I-2 care suites. Care suites in Group I-2 shall comply with Sections 407.4.4.1 through 407.4.4.4 and either Section 407.4.4.5 or 407.4.4.6.

Care suites are typically either groups of patient sleeping rooms or groups of care and treatment rooms and associated support/staff spaces that operate as a unit. Care suites are recognized to be an effective tool to provide some flexibility, due to functional considerations, in providing appropriate patient care and allowing for the ability to reach an exit access. Use of suites is a particularly useful tool at intensive care units and emergency departments in patient treatment areas. The ability to have a full visual wall system or open plan not only allows for patient privacy and improved patient care but also functions as extremely beneficial during any type of emergency situation, including defending-in-place and evacuation.

Patient treatment and sleeping rooms are permitted to be arranged as suites (see Commentary Figure 407.4.4 for an example plan of a patient suite). The figure illustrates a patient suite greater than 100 m \( ^{2} \)  where two remote egress doors are required. The criteria in this section recognize the low patient-to-staff ratio of these facilities where the staff is directly responsible for the safety of the care recipients in the event of a fire.

Care suites allow for the elimination of the smoke partition between the patient rooms and the staff areas. By considering the connected space an intervening room rather than a corridor, these provisions can be applied.

While not prohibited in nursing homes, suite configurations are more commonly found in hospitals.

“Care suites” are carefully defined (see Section 202), with the focus on suites of sleeping rooms and suites of care and treatment rooms. Included in the suite would be support spaces such as the nurses’ stations and linen rooms. The use of the term “care suite” is not intended to prohibit other groups of rooms that are not patient care areas, such as the business offices, to be arranged in suites, but such noncare suites would not be allowed to use Section 407.4.4 for the arrangement of means of egress.

407.4.4.1 Exit access through care suites. Exit access from all other portions of a building not classified as a care suite shall not pass through a care suite.

Suites are intended to serve specific functions for patient treatment or sleeping. This section clarifies that the suite should not be used as part of the exit access of other areas within the building. It is intended to prevent corridors from discharging into a maze of intervening rooms prior to entering the exit.

407.4.4.2 Separation. Care suites shall be separated from other portions of the building, including other care suites, by a smoke partition complying with Section 710.

This section clarifies the type of partition that should be used to separate the suite from the corridor, adjacent suite or any other portion of the building. This section requires separation by a smoke partition similar to the construction of a corridor wall in Group I-2 (see Section 407.3).

407.4.4.3 Access to corridor. Every care suite shall have a door leading directly to an exit access corridor or horizontal exit. Movement from habitable rooms within a care suite shall not require more than 30 m of travel within the care suite to a door leading to the exit access corridor or horizontal exit. Where a care suite is required to have more than one exit access door by Section 407.4.4.5.2 or 407.4.4.6.2, the additional door shall lead directly to an exit access corridor, exit or an adjacent suite.

Travel distance within the suite is limited to 30 m and is measured from the most remote point in the suite to the closest door to a corridor outside the suite or a horizontal exit. If the suite is large enough that it needs two ways out, the second path can be through another suite. Table 1017.2 limits the total travel distance within Group I-2 occupancies to 60 m. Therefore, where you have 30 m of travel within the suite, you only have 30 m outside of the care suite before your travel must reach an exit. The Section 407.4.2 limit of a maximum 15 m travel distance within a patient sleeping room to an exit access door does not apply to patient rooms within care suites.

407.4.4.4 Doors within care suites. Doors in care suites serving habitable rooms shall be permitted to comply with one of the following:

1 Manually operated horizontal sliding doors permitted in accordance with Exception 9 to Section 1010.1.2.

2 Power-operated doors permitted in accordance with Section 1010.1.2, Exception 7.

3 Means of egress doors complying with Section 1010.

Within care suites, patient rooms and treatment rooms are generally not required by the code to have doors. However, for clinical needs (infection control, privacy, noise control, etc.), doors are commonly required for rooms within care suites. This section clarifies what types of doors are permitted within a suite. Considered in the allowances is that staff will be assisting

===== Page 0311 =====
in evacuation and will be familiar with door operation.

407.4.4.5 Care suites containing sleeping room areas. Sleeping rooms shall be permitted to be grouped into care suites where one of the following criteria is met:

1 The care suite is not used as an exit access for more than eight care recipient beds.

2 The arrangement of the care suite allows for direct and constant visual supervision into the sleeping rooms by care providers.

3 An automatic smoke detection system is provided in the sleeping rooms and installed in accordance with NFPA 72.

In addition to complying with Sections 407.4.4 through 407.4.4.4, care suites containing patient sleeping rooms must comply with Sections 407.4.4.5 and 407.4.4.5.2. The three items of this section are options. The suite can be limited to eight beds. It can have more than eight beds provided the suite is arranged such that each patient sleeping room is within direct and constant visual supervision or an automatic smoke detection system is provided. The smoke detection option is provided where direct supervision of patients by staff is not possible. Smoke detection in the patient room provides equivalent early detection of a fire. Section 407.4.4.5.1 will provide the overall size limit to the care suite.

407.4.4.5.1 Area. Care suites containing sleeping rooms shall be not greater than 700 m \( ^{2} \)  in area.

Exception: Care suites containing sleeping rooms shall be permitted to be not greater than 900 m \( ^{2} \)  in area where an automatic smoke detection system is provided throughout the care suite and installed in accordance with NFPA 72.

The combined area of the patient sleeping rooms, the staff areas and any associated spaces (e.g., clean room, nutrition center, storage room) and any intervening rooms are permitted to have a total area of 700 m². The care suite perimeter is defined by its separations from other care suites, other portions of the occupancy and from corridors in accordance with earlier provisions of Section 407. Increasing the area to 900 m² allows inclusion of more staff and support spaces within the suite. Operationally, this is a key factor because the staff will not need to leave the suite as often in order to retrieve supplies or to access the staff toilet, which will improve the response time of the staff during a medical emergency, or a fire/safety situation.
407.4.4.5.2 Exit access. Any sleeping room, or any care suite that contains sleeping rooms, of more than 100 m² shall have not fewer than two exit access doors from the care suite located in accordance with Section 1007.

A care suite that contains a patient sleeping room and an area of 100 m² or less can be provided with only one exit access door to a corridor, provided that the 30 m maximum travel distance (see Section 407.4.4.3) is met. For suites that contain patient sleeping rooms and have an area of between 100 m² and 1000 m², there must be at least two exit access doors to corridors, or one access door to a corridor and one to an adjoining care suite as allowed by Section 407.4.4.1.

Because this section allows a single exit access door from suites smaller than 100 m², and Section 407.4.4.3 allows a maximum travel distance within a suite of either 30 m or 38 m, there could be a configuration within a suite where the common path of travel exceeds the limits found in Table 1006.2.1. For rooms within suites, a greater common path of travel is allowed, provided the maximum travel distance established in Section 407.4.4.3 is met.

407.4.4.6 Care suites not containing sleeping rooms. Areas not containing sleeping rooms, but only treatment areas and the associated rooms, spaces or circulation space, shall be permitted to be grouped into care suites and shall conform to the limitations in Sections 407.4.4.6.1 and 407.4.4.6.2.

According to the definition for "Care suite" in Chapter 2, suites covered by these provisions are limited to areas that include patient sleeping rooms or patient treatment rooms. This group of sections addresses suites for patient treatment rooms. Common examples include diagnostic or therapy areas where the function of treatment requires adjacency. This could also include inpatient or outpatient surgery suites, emergency treatment area suites or areas such as recovery rooms or dialysis treatment centers. Care recipients may be anesthetized, but staff/patient ratios are high and staff is trained in proper evacuation procedures. In addition to complying with Sections 407.4.4 through 407.4.4.4, care suites that do not contain patient sleeping rooms must comply with Sections 407.4.4.6, 407.4.4.6.1 and 407.4.4.6.2.

407.4.4.6.1 Area. Care suites of rooms, other than sleeping rooms, shall have an area not greater than 1200 m².

Exception: Care suites not containing sleeping rooms shall be permitted to be not greater than 1400 m² in area where

===== Page 0312 =====
an automatic smoke detection system is provided throughout the care suite in accordance with Section 907.

A 900 m² limitation for care suites not containing sleeping rooms was in the legacy codes before sprinkler protection was required in Group I-2 occupancies. Designs to address current diagnostic and treatment methods have proven difficult to achieve within the previous 900 m² requirement. Sprinkler protection provides an additional level of life safety to building occupants, which justifies the area increase to 1200 m². Additionally, providing an automatic smoke detection system throughout a care suite provides an added level of life safety, which can be used to increase the area to 1400 m². Sprinkler protection and smoke detection are very effective measures of providing life safety to building occupants. Providing these additional levels of life safety will allow for more functional design to better meet increased space requirements for the area of a care suite not containing sleeping rooms.

407.4.4.6.2 Exit access. Care suites, other than sleeping rooms, with an area of more than 230 m² shall have not fewer than two exit access doors from the care suite located in accordance with Section 1007.

A suite that contains a patient treatment room and an area of 230 m² or less can have only one exit access door to a corridor, provided that the maximum travel distance within the suite does not exceed the 30 m exit access limit set by Section 407.4.4.3. For suites that contain patient treatment rooms and have an area of between 230 m² and 1400 m², there must be at least two exit access doors to the corridor, or one access door to the corridor and one to an adjoining care suite as allowed by Section 407.4.4.1. These doors must meet the separation requirements in Section 1007. In a two-exit suite, at least one of the exits must be within the travel distance of every point in the suite as specified in Section 407.4.4.3.

Because this section allows a single-exit access door from suites smaller than 230 m², and Section 407.4.4.3 allows a maximum travel distance within a suite of either 30 m or 38 m, there could be a configuration of a suite where the common path of travel within the suite exceeds the limits found in Table 1006.2.1. For rooms within suites, a greater common path of travel is allowed, provided the maximum travel distance established in Section 407.4.4.3 is met.

407.5 Smoke barriers. Smoke barriers shall be provided to subdivide every story used by persons receiving care, treatment or sleeping into not fewer than two smoke compartments. Smoke barriers shall be provided to subdivide other stories with an occupant load of 50 or more persons, into not fewer than two smoke compartments. The smoke barrier shall be in accordance with Section 709.

One of the basic premises of this section is that vertical evacuation of care recipients in Group I-2 occupancies is extremely difficult where care recipients are incapable of self-preservation or require ongoing care. It is essential, therefore, to provide a refuge area on every story used by care recipients for sleeping, care or treatment. The refuge area is intended to provide a protected area to which care recipients may be relocated if it becomes necessary to evacuate them from their original rooms. For this reason, each story used by care recipients for sleeping, care or treatment and all other stories with an occupant load of 50 or more must be divided into at least two smoke compartments.

Smoke barriers used to divide one smoke compartment from the next are to be constructed in accordance with Section 709 and with horizontal assemblies as specified in Section 407.5.3. The smoke barrier is different from the smoke partitions required for corridor walls in Section 407.3. Among other things, a smoke barrier is required to have a fire-resistance rating of 1 hour and, except as otherwise provided for in the exception to Section 709.4, provide a continuous separation through all concealed spaces to resist the passage of fire and smoke (see Commentary Figure 407.5).

407.5.1 Smoke compartment size. Stories shall be divided into smoke compartments with an area of not more than 2100 m² in Group I-2, except:

Exceptions:

1. A smoke compartment in Group I-2, Condition 2 is permitted to have an area of not more than 3700 m² provided that all patient sleeping rooms within that smoke compartment are configured for single patient occupancy and any suite within the smoke compartment complies with Section 407.4.4.

2. A smoke compartment in Group I-2, Condition 2 without patient sleeping rooms is permitted to have an area of not more than 3700 m².

Each smoke compartment is limited to an area of not more than 2100 m² for nursing homes (Group I-2, Condition 1) and 3700 m² for hospitals (Group I-2, Condition 2) (see the definition of "Smoke compartment" in Section 202). The maximum area of the smoke compartment provides two protection features.

===== Page 0313 =====
First, the number of persons who are exposed to smoke and fumes will be limited. Typical designs indicate that the number of persons exposed will usually be less than 100 and, more likely, 50 or less. Second, the overall dimensions of the smoke compartment must result in a maximum travel distance to the smoke barrier door of 60 m for all design configurations.

407.5.2 Exit access travel distance. The distance of travel from any point in a smoke compartment to a smoke barrier door shall be not greater than 60 m.

The travel distance from any point in a smoke compartment to a smoke barrier door is limited to 60 m. This is distinct from the travel distance to exits. This distance is limiting the distance that care providers and care recipients must travel until reaching another smoke compartment and the refuge area it contains. Travel to an exit enclosure or exit door is not a substitute for travel to the smoke barrier and a separate compartment (see Commentary Figure 407.5). Every occupied space must be able to meet both travel distance to an exit and to the entrance to an adjacent smoke compartment. The maximum travel distance to an exit is also 60 m.

407.5.3 Refuge area. Refuge areas shall be provided within each smoke compartment. The size of the refuge area shall accommodate the occupants and care recipients from the adjoining smoke compartment. Where a smoke compartment is adjoined by two or more smoke compartments, the minimum area of the refuge area shall accommodate the largest occupant load of the adjoining compartments. The size of the refuge area shall provide the following:

1 Not less than 2.8 m² for each care recipient confined to bed or stretcher.

2 Not less than 0.56 m² for each ambulatory care recipient not confined to bed or stretcher and for other occupants.

Areas or spaces permitted to be included in the calculation of refuge area are corridors, sleeping areas, treatment rooms, lounge or dining areas and other low-hazard areas.

To provide adequate space for occupants who might be relocated to an adjacent smoke compartment, open space for refuge areas must be available. In the determination of the adequacy of the refuge areas, minimum net areas per occupant are required. In determining the area available, it should be noted that the facility may still need to function as a medical care facility even while the care recipients are relocated. On floors housing non-ambulatory patients (i.e., care recipient sleeping floors), a minimum of 2.8 m² per patient is required to be provided in low-hazard areas, such as waiting areas, corridors or patient rooms. This is to permit the relocation of the care recipient on a bed or stretcher to an area of safety on the same floor. The 2.8 m² is intended only to apply to the number of care recipients and not the calculated occupant load as determined using Table 1004.5.

For floors classified as Group I-2 that are not used for care recipient sleeping rooms (i.e., treatment floors), the net area required is 0.56 m² per occupant. In this instance, the area required is based on the calculated occupant load as determined by Table 1004.5. The 0.56 m² minimum is based on an assumption that some occupants will be using walkers, wheelchairs and possibly a few litters for care recipients who are being transported through the area at the time of the fire.

The refuge area must be able to accommodate all of the occupants and care recipients from the adjoining smoke compartment based on the factors described previously in this section. Where a smoke compartment containing a refuge area is adjoined by multiple smoke compartments, the minimum required size of the refuge area is to be based on the largest of the occupant loads of the adjoining compartments. It is assumed that the refuge area will only need to serve one adjacent smoke compartment.

Where there are multiple smoke compartments on the same level, each smoke compartment must have open space for the largest number of evacuees. Space for people already in the smoke compartment should be considered in the design but does not have to be considered for determining the refuge area square meter requirements. Remember, the idea is for smoke compartments to be part of the "defend-in-place" scenario commonly used in hospitals and nursing homes (see commentary, Section 407.1).

Refuge areas required by this section are distinct from areas of refuge and exterior areas of assisted rescue required by Section 1009 for accessible means of egress.

407.5.4 Independent egress. A means of egress shall be provided from each smoke compartment created by smoke barriers without having to return through the smoke compartment from which means of egress originated. Smoke compartments that do not contain an exit shall be provided with direct access to not less than two adjacent smoke compartments.

To prevent creation of a dead-end smoke compartment, exits are to be arranged so as to permit access without returning through a smoke compartment from which egress

===== Page 0314 =====
originated. This section does not require an exit from within each smoke compartment, but where the compartment does not have an exit, then it must have direct access to two adjacent smoke compartments. While this might be seen as allowing a string of compartments, the travel distance will eventually result in the provision of an exit. See Commentary Figures 407.5.4(1) and 407.5.4(2) for acceptable and unacceptable egress arrangements.

407.5.5 Horizontal assemblies. Horizontal assemblies supporting smoke barriers required by this section shall be designed to resist the movement of smoke. Elevator lobbies shall be in accordance with Section 3006.2.

In order to maintain the integrity of a smoke compartment, the horizontal assemblies supporting the smoke barrier walls must also be designed to resist the passage of smoke. With the combination of these horizontal assemblies and the smoke barriers, a complete smoke-protected compartment is achieved. Provisions of Section 711.2.4.4 address openings and penetrations of each horizontal assembly providing a barrier to smoke. Elevators and other large openings will have to be in a shaft enclosure. A lobby complying with Section 3006.2 will need to be provided for such elevators.

407.6 Automatic-closing doors. Automatic-closing doors with hold-open devices shall comply with Sections 709.5 and 716.2.

The section points to two key sections that provide requirements of automatic-closing doors.

407.6.1 Activation of automatic-closing doors. Automatic-closing doors on hold-open devices in accordance with Section 716.2.6.6 shall also close upon activation of a fire alarm system, an automatic sprinkler system, or both. The automatic release of the hold-open device on one door shall release all such doors within the same smoke compartment.

Doors across corridors are often held open for ease of circulation during normal operation. These doors must close upon either the activation of the fire alarm or sprinkler system. All the doors in the same horizontal assembly/smoke barrier that bounds the smoke compartment must be interconnected so that they all close in order to minimize the chance of any smoke getting into the refuge area. This provides a higher level of life-safety for the residents and care recipients.

407.7 Automatic sprinkler system. Smoke compartments containing sleeping rooms shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Sections 903.3.1.1 and 903.3.2.
Recognizing the effectiveness of an automatic sprinkler system, the reference to Section 903.3.1.1 clarifies that the suppression system required by Section 903.2.6 must be a sprinkler system in accordance with the code and NFPA 13. Furthermore, in response to recent proven technology, smoke compartments containing patient rooms are required to be equipped throughout with quick-response or residential sprinklers as set forth in Item 1 in Section 903.3.2.

Most fire injuries in hospitals begin with the ignition of clothing on a person, a mattress, a pillow, bedding or linen. The Building and Fire Research Laboratory of NIST conducted fire tests in patient rooms using quick-response sprinklers and smoke detectors. The test results were published in a July 1993 report entitled, "Measurement of Room Conditions and Response of Sprinklers and Smoke Detectors During a Simulated Two-bed Hospital Patient Room Fire." The report concluded that quick-response sprinklers actuated before any life would be threatened by a fire in a care recipient's (patient's) room. Prior to the development of quick-response sprinkler technology, smoke detection in care recipient rooms classified as Group I-2 occupancies was typically required, due to the slower response time of standard sprinklers. While properly operating standard sprinklers are effective, the extent of fire growth and smoke production that can occur before sprinkler activation creates the need for early warning to enable faster response by the care providers and initiation of egress that is critical in occupancies containing persons incapable of self-preservation. With quick-response or residential sprinklers installed throughout the smoke compartment, and additional protection provided as indicated for spaces open to corridors, incidental uses and certain specific health care facilities, smoke detectors in care recipient sleeping rooms are not required in Group I-2 occupancies.

407.8 Fire alarm system. A fire alarm system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.6.

Fire alarms are essential to this occupancy where many of those receiving care and treatment cannot leave a fire incident area without the assistance of staff. The alarm system is a key part of the safeguards to protect care recipients. The specific requirements associated with these alarm systems are found in Sections 907.2.6 and 907.2.6.2.

407.9 Automatic fire detection. Corridors in Group I-2, Condition 1, occupancies and spaces permitted to be open to the corridors by Section

===== Page 0315 =====
407.2 shall be equipped with an automatic fire detection system.

Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancies shall be equipped with smoke detection as required in Section 407.2.

## Exceptions:

1. Corridor smoke detection is not required where sleeping rooms are provided with smoke detectors that comply with UL 268. Such detectors shall provide a visual display on the corridor side of each sleeping room and an audible and visual alarm at the care provider's station attending each unit.

2. Corridor smoke detection is not required where sleeping room doors are equipped with automatic door-closing devices with integral smoke detectors on the unit sides installed in accordance with their listing, provided that the integral detectors perform the required alerting function.

Automatic fire detection is required in corridors and areas open to corridors in nursing homes, Group I-2, Condition 1 occupancies and long-term care and detoxification facilities. In recognition of quick-response sprinkler technology and the fact that the sprinkler system is electronically supervised and doors to sleeping rooms are supervised by staff on a continual basis when in the open position, it is now believed that in-room smoke detectors are not required for adequate fire safety in sleeping rooms. In nursing homes, long-term care facilities and detoxification facilities, however, some redundancy is appropriate because such facilities typically have less control over furnishings and personal items and, thereby, result in a less predictable and usually higher fire hazard load than other Group I-2 occupancies. Also, there is generally less staff supervision in these facilities than in other health care facilities and, thus, less control over patient smoking and other fire causes. To provide additional protection against fires spreading from the room of origin, therefore, automatic fire detection is required in corridors of nursing homes, long-term care facilities and detoxification facilities. It should be noted that fire detection is not required in corridors of other Group I-2 occupancies except where otherwise specifically required in the code (see Sections 407.2.1 through 407.2.4, 907.2.6 and 907.2.6.2). Similarly, since areas open to the corridor very often are the room of fire origin and because such areas are not required by the code to be under visual supervision by staff, some redundancy to protection by the sprinkler system is required. Accordingly, all areas open to corridors must be protected by an automatic fire detection system. This requirement provides an additional level of protection against sprinkler system failures or lapses in staff supervision. There are two exceptions to the requirement for an automatic fire detection system in corridors of nursing homes, long-term care facilities and detoxification facilities. In both exceptions, the alternative methods of protection specifically provide an equivalent level of safety to what is required in care recipient sleeping rooms.

Exception 1 requires smoke detectors to be located in the care recipient's sleeping room and to activate both a visual display on the corridor side of the patient room and a visual and audible alarm at the care provider's station serving or attending the room. Detectors complying with UL 268 are intended for open area protection and for connection to a normal power supply or as part of a fire alarm system. This exception, however, is specifically designed so as not to require the detectors to activate the building's fire alarm system where approved sleeping room smoke detectors are installed and where visual and audible alarms are provided. This is in response to the concern over unwanted alarms. It should be noted that the nursing/care provider call system may typically be used to identify numerous conditions within the room and might not necessarily specify a fire emergency but rather for staff to investigate the reason for the alarm. Exception 2 addresses the situation where smoke detectors are incorporated within automatic door-closing devices. The units are acceptable as long as the required alarm functions are still provided. Such units are usually listed as combination door-closer and holdopen devices.

407.10 Secured yards. Grounds are permitted to be fenced and gates therein are permitted to be equipped with locks, provided that safe dispersal areas having 2.8 m² for bed and stretcher care recipients and 0.56 m² for ambulatory care recipients and other occupants are located between the building and the fence. Such provided safe dispersal areas shall be located not less than 15 m from the building they serve.

Group I-2 occupancies, particularly those specializing in the treatment of mental disabilities such as Alzheimer's, often provide a secured yard for care recipient use. During an emergency, it may be difficult to safeguard care recipients if they are allowed to have direct access to a public way. This section essentially creates a safe area where people may move from the building without having unrestricted access to the public way.

===== Page 0316 =====
407.11 Electrical systems. In Group I-2 occupancies, the essential electrical system for electrical components, equipment and systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 27 and NFPA 99.

This section's mandate for compliance with NFPA 99 will ensure the required power system is provided in Group I-2 occupancies. A reference to Chapter 27 will comprehensively address electrical systems, including references to NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401), NFPA 110 and 111.

## SECTION 408 GROUP I-3

408.1 General. Occupancies in Group I-3 shall comply with the provisions of Sections 408.1 through 408.11 and other applicable provisions of this code (see Section 308.4).

The provisions of Section 408 address the unique features of detention and correctional occupancies in Group I-3. The provisions are based on full-scale fire tests, fire experience (in particular several multiple death fires that occurred between 1974 and 1979) and the provisions for occupancies in Group I-2. With respect to evacuation, occupancies in Groups I-2 and I-3 are similar in that the occupants are typically not capable of self-preservation and, therefore, staff must assist in evacuation. The general approach is a defend-in-place philosophy based on the difficulties associated with evacuation, especially in medium- and high-security facilities. The first level of protection is established as the room that is typically a sleeping room or cell. Horizontal evacuation to an adjacent smoke compartment provides the second level of protection, and vertical evacuation is the third level of protection. The evacuation difficulty associated with occupancies in Group I-3 is not occupant mobility; rather, it is the need to maintain security and, in some instances, to keep the residents segregated. There are also instances, such as protected witness facilities, in which the identity of the occupant must not be revealed to other occupants or the public.

It is recognized that the broad classification of Group I-3 includes a variety of locking arrangements based on the various levels of security required. As such, Section 308.4 contains definitions for five different occupancy conditions that are intended to represent the various locking arrangements and different levels of security (see commentary, Section 308.4). Regardless of the security level, fire protection and life safety features must be provided in order to achieve an acceptable level of protection without interfering with the operation of the facility and the need to maintain security.
This section has been developed out of considerations unique to detention and correctional facilities and to facilitate the consideration of the entire package of protection features. The basic protection features provided include early detection, fire containment, evacuation and fire extinguishment. Section 403.8.3 of SBC 801 contains provisions for emergency preparedness, including staff training, staffing requirements and the need to be able to obtain and identify emergency keys. Additional consideration should be given to restricting the fuel load within resident housing areas. It should also be noted that Section 509 contains provisions for incidental uses within Group I-3. The incidental uses represent different degrees of hazard than are associated with the hazards of the primary building area in this case, the housing of occupants under physical restraint. The different hazard is typically related to the basic nature of the contents or the quantity of combustibles.

The provisions of Section 408 apply to all occupancies in Group I-3 and those portions of occupancies that are considered Group I-3, except Condition 1 facilities (see Commentary Figure 408.1). As defined in Section 308.4.1, Condition 1 facilities permit free egress even to the exterior and, therefore, such occupancies are subject to the same provisions applicable to Group R.

The elimination of Condition 1 from the provisions of Section 408 may result in some interesting applications of the code. For example, the corridor separation requirements in Section 1020.2 for occupancies in Group R are more restrictive than the corridor requirements for occupancies in Group I-3. Condition 2. This may result in a request to consider a facility as Condition 2 even though the building is really Condition 1. Such a request could be considered acceptable only where the additional requirements in the code and in SBC 801 for Condition 2 are met, including automatic fire suppression and staffing (see Section 403.8.3.2 of SBC 801).

408.2 Other occupancies. Buildings or portions of buildings in Group I-3 occupancies where security operations necessitate the locking of required means of egress shall be permitted to be classified as a different occupancy. Occupancies classified as other than Group I-3 shall meet the applicable requirements of this code for that occupancy where provisions are made for the release of occupants at all times.

Means of egress from detention and correctional occupancies that traverse other use areas shall, as a minimum, conform to requirements for detention

===== Page 0317 =====
and correctional occupancies.

Exception: It is permissible to exit through a horizontal exit into other contiguous occupancies that do not conform to detention and correctional occupancy egress provisions but that do comply with requirements set forth in the appropriate occupancy, as long as the occupancy is not a Group H use.

In accordance with the provisions of Section 508, portions of an occupancy in Group I-3 may be classified as a separate occupancy and meet the provisions of the code for that occupancy. Since the area may be used by the residents, however, a need may exist for the other occupancy to also contain security provisions, such as the locking of egress doors. This section specifically permits such a condition as long as arrangements have been made for release of the occupants within these areas at any time they are occupied. Acceptable methods include having either staff operate the locks or remote release of the locks, similar to that which is provided in the housing areas.

Although it is indicated that the section applies to portions of occupancies in Group I-3, consideration should be given to allow the necessary security to be provided in separate buildings that are part of a detention or correctional facility. Applications of this section should be restricted to the buildings that must be secure because they are occupied by residents, and arrangements for quick release of the locks must be provided at all times the building is occupied. If residents are to be permitted into an area or building without staff supervision, the residents should be able to initiate their own evacuation.

The means of egress provisions from this section and Chapter 10 that are applicable to Group I-3 are also applicable to the path through different occupancies. For example, where the means of egress from a cell block wing traverses through a Group A area, then the requirements of the code for the Group I-3 egress are also applicable to the path through the assembly occupancy.

The exception in the code permits egress through a different occupancy, other than Group H, that is separated from the Group I-3 areas by either a fire wall or fire barrier. A horizontal exit complying with Section 1026 must be provided in this wall or barrier. This separation voids the requirements that Group I-3 egress provisions are also applicable to the different occupancies. The reason for this, of course, is that Group I-3 occupants have fled the immediate effects of the fire condition in the original detention or correctional areas and are now harbored in a refuge area.

408.3 Means of egress. Except as modified or as provided for in this section, the means of egress provisions of Chapter 10 shall apply.

Because of the need to provide security in occupancies in Group I-3, many of the means of egress requirements of Chapter 10 have been modified for Group I-3. Except where modified in Section 408, all other provisions of Chapter 10 are applicable.

408.3.1 Door width. Doors to resident sleeping units shall have a clear width of not less than 700 mm.

Except for sleeping units that are provided to meet accessible unit provisions of Section 1108.5.5, sleeping unit doors may be a minimum of 700 mm in width. This section is not intended to negate the need to provide a 800 mm door where the room is intended to serve as part of an accessible route. In an occupancy in Group I-3, most sleeping units and even sections of the prison need not be accessible (see Sections 1103.2.13 and 1108.5.5).

408.3.2 Sliding doors. Where doors in a means of egress are of the horizontal-sliding type, the force to slide the door to its fully open position shall be not greater than 220 N with a perpendicular force against the door of 220 N.

Swinging doors in occupancies in Group I-3 may not be acceptable for security reasons. Where the door swings into a room, the door can easily be blocked and staff access can be prevented. Where the door swings out, staff does not have control of the door and the residents can use the door as a means to overcome a staff member. Therefore, horizontal sliding doors are used quite extensively and are permitted in the means of egress. The doors must be capable of being opened with a force of 220 N even if a 220 N force is being applied perpendicular to the door. The maximum force permitted to open the door exceeds the restrictions in Section 1010.1.3 in recognition of the physical capabilities of staff members.

408.3.3 Guard tower doors. A hatch or trap door not less than 1.5 m \( ^{2} \)  in area through the floor and having dimensions of not less than 600 mm in any direction shall be permitted to be used as a portion of the means of egress from guard towers.

This provision allows the use of trap doors in the floor of an observation location as both the access and the means of egress from the tower. In order to provide the 360-degree visibility necessary for guard observation stations, the size of the base of each such elevated station must be kept to a minimum.

===== Page 0318 =====
These towers are usually limited to prison/jail staff. The trap doors work in conjunction with the spiral stairway and ship's ladders provisions of the next two sections.

408.3.4 Spiral stairways. Spiral stairways that conform to the requirements of Section 1011.10 are permitted for access to and between staff locations.

Recognizing the physical capabilities of the staff, spiral stairways are permitted for access to and between staff locations. In multiple story facilities, spiral stairways are often used between staff control areas on different levels. As such, staff can move between the areas without entering adjacent housing areas and without losing the space that would be required for a traditional stairway. Spiral stairways provide an option for vertical circulation in guard towers and similar observation areas where the floor area is limited, and the desire is to have the least amount of obstruction of floor area possible.

408.3.5 Ship’s ladders. Ship’s ladders shall be permitted for egress from control rooms or elevated facility observation rooms in accordance with Section 1011.15.

Ship’s ladders are another alternative to spiral stairways for providing vertical paths of access and egress within a Group I-3 occupancy. These are intended for access to locations used by prison/jail staff. The design standard for ship’s ladders is found in Section 1011.15. In that section, the code limits any spaces accessed by a ship’s ladders to a maximum of 23 m \( ^{2} \)  and a maximum of three occupants (see commentary, Section 1011.15).

408.3.6 Exit discharge. Exits are permitted to discharge into a fenced or walled courtyard. Enclosed yards or courts shall be of a size to accommodate all occupants, be located not less than 15 m from the building and have an area of not less than 1.4 m \( ^{2} \)  per person.

For security purposes, exits from areas in Group I-3 do not normally provide access to a public way. In some instances, the building is located in a complex that has perimeter walls preventing access to a public way but that permit occupants to move away from the building. In other instances, or in complexes where the mixing of residents must be controlled, one or more yards or courts are provided for exit discharge. Such arrangements are acceptable, provided that the occupants have an area that is at least 1.4 m \( ^{2} \)  per person and is located at least 15 m from the building.

This 15 m distance enables residents to move away from the building and should have adequate spatial separation especially since the building is required to be protected with an automatic fire suppression system in accordance with Section 903.2.6. The 1.4 m \( ^{2} \)  measurement is provided so that the residents have adequate space in which to stand and to move around, since they may need to remain in the yard or court for some time.

408.3.7 Sallyports. A sallyport shall be permitted in a means of egress where there are provisions for continuous and unobstructed passage through the sallyport during an emergency egress condition.

A sallyport is a compartment established for security purposes that restricts the movement of individuals. A sallyport consists of two or more security doors that do not normally operate simultaneously. One door will not normally open until the other doors are closed and locked. Sallyports are provided for security purposes to control movement and passage of residents from one area to another. The sallyport is to be arranged such that during an emergency, the doors may be opened simultaneously so as to permit free and unobstructed movement from the area. In many instances, the sallyport doors contain a manual release that can be operated by staff during an emergency to override the normal electric operation.

Although not addressed by this section, where the sallyport is in the path that the fire department or fire brigade will use to bring fire hoses, additional consideration may need to be given to permit the hose to go through the sallyport. An alternative would be to provide a standpipe connection on the housing area side of the sallyport.

408.3.8 Interior exit stairway and ramp construction. One interior exit stairway or ramp in each building shall be permitted to have glazing installed in doors and interior walls at each landing level providing access to the interior exit stairway or ramp, provided that the following conditions are met:

1 The interior exit stairway or ramp shall not serve more than four floor levels.

2 Exit doors shall be not less than 3/4-hour fire door assemblies complying with Section 716.

3 The total area of glazing at each floor level shall not exceed  \( 3.2 \, m^{2} \)  and individual panels of glazing shall not exceed  \( 0.84 \, m^{2} \) .

4 The glazing shall be protected on both sides by an automatic sprinkler system. The sprinkler system shall be designed to wet completely the entire surface of any glazing affected by fire when actuated.

5 The glazing shall be in a gasketed frame and installed in such a manner that the framing

===== Page 0319 =====
system will deflect without breaking (loading) the glass before the sprinkler system operates.

6 Obstructions, such as curtain rods, drapery traverse rods, curtains, drapes or similar materials shall not be installed between the automatic sprinklers and the glazing.

In addressing the security needs in Group I-3, the limitation on openings in the interior exit stairways given in Sections 1023.2, 1023.4 and 1023.5 is modified to facilitate visibility into the exit.

An interior exit stairway that is open to view in a correctional facility is useful and necessary for two reasons. First, the movement of the inmates is observable, thus reducing the potential for concealment, physical attacks on other inmates and other undesirable activities that could otherwise take place in enclosed spaces that are not observable.

Second, the movement of inmates who are under physical restraint is observable from the exterior, thus increasing the level of safety for correctional officers. The alternative of closed-circuit television within the interior exit stairway is not as desirable because the potential for malfunction of or intentional damage to the equipment makes this method a less reliable form of observation.

The conditions specified that permit glazing require full enclosure of the floor opening so that there is no direct communication between stories. These criteria provide a measure of fire integrity, if somewhat less than that otherwise required of an interior exit stairway.

408.4 Locks. Egress doors are permitted to be locked in accordance with the applicable use condition. Doors from a refuge area to the outside are permitted to be locked with a key in lieu of locking methods described in Section 408.4.1. The keys to unlock the exterior doors shall be available at all times and the locks shall be operable from both sides of the door.

The locking arrangements for egress doors depend on the occupancy condition (1, 2, 3, 4 or 5) given in Section 308.4. Except for Condition 1 buildings, the doors to the exterior from an occupancy in Group I-3 may be locked and need not be remotely controlled. The door locks are to be arranged so that they can be released from the exterior of the building, as well as the interior. This feature accomplishes two purposes. First, since the door can be unlocked from the outside, staff need not enter the housing area in which the fire may be located to release the locks. Second, many facilities do not permit staff members in the housing area to carry the keys for the exterior doors; therefore, there may be no benefit in requiring the door lock to be arranged to permit operation from the interior, although such an arrangement is not prohibited.

The provisions of Section 403.8.3.4 of SBC 801 concerning the marking of keys applies to both exterior and interior door locks. For this reason, it is usually desirable to minimize the number of keys required for an emergency; therefore, the exterior doors will most likely be keyed alike. Unfortunately, many facilities do not take this into consideration and the number of emergency keys becomes excessive to the extent that it is virtually impossible to identify each key by sight and touch.

408.4.1 Remote release. Remote release of locks on doors in a means of egress shall be provided with reliable means of operation, remote from the resident living areas, to release locks on all required doors. In Occupancy Condition 3 or 4, the arrangement, accessibility and security of the release mechanisms required for egress shall be such that with the minimum available staff at any time, the lock mechanisms are capable of being released within 2 minutes.

Exception: Provisions for remote locking and unlocking of occupied rooms in Occupancy Condition 4 are not required provided that not more than 10 locks are necessary to be unlocked in order to move occupants from one smoke compartment to a refuge area within 3 minutes. The opening of necessary locks shall be accomplished with not more than two separate keys.

The provisions of this section do not mandate remote release locks; rather, the facility determines the level and manner in which security is to be provided. Door locking arrangements fall into one of the conditions defined in Section 308.4. where remote release locks are provided, the means of operating them must be external to the resident housing area so the staff is not required to enter the housing area to release the locks. Clearly, in Conditions 3 and 4, excessive delay in releasing locks puts the occupants at additional risk. Locks in Conditions 3 and 4 must be able to be released promptly (within 2 minutes) with the minimum staff that will be available. A control center is typically provided for two or more housing areas from which the locks are controlled. In evaluating the use and arrangement of the remote release, consideration must be given to the intended staffing levels at different times of the day, as well as the locations of the remote release. The condition definitions of Section 308.4 are intended to relate to the time necessary to

===== Page 0320 =====
evacuate the residents to a refuge area, such as a smoke compartment; therefore, in Condition 4, manual release locks may be used only where no more than 10 locks have to be unlocked in order to move all occupants from one smoke compartment to another and provided that this can be accomplished within 3 minutes. The time period of 3 minutes is presumed to be a reasonable staff response time to a fire emergency. So that the time to release the locks is kept to a minimum, it cannot take more than two separate keys to release the 10 locks. Again, the intended staff levels of the facility need to be considered (see Commentary Figure 408.4.1).

408.4.2 Power-operated doors and locks. Power-operated sliding doors or power-operated locks for swinging doors shall be operable by a manual release mechanism at the door. Emergency power shall be provided for the doors and locks in accordance with Section 2702.

## Exceptions:

1. Emergency power is not required in facilities with 10 or fewer locks complying with the exception to Section 408.4.1.

2. Emergency power is not required where remote mechanical operating releases are provided.

To increase the likelihood that the doors in the means of egress can be operated even during a power failure, two alternative locking arrangements are required wherever the doors or locks are electrically operated. First, a manual release mechanism is to be provided at the door. Also, a remote backup (second) mechanical operating door release system must be provided, or the electrical door control system must be provided with an emergency power source. Where provided, the mechanical operating door release system must be capable of being operated from outside the residential housing area.

This section does not apply to manually operated doors and locks that meet the requirements of the exception to Section 408.4.1.

408.4.3 Redundant operation. Remote release, mechanically operated sliding doors or remote release, mechanically operated locks shall be provided with a mechanically operated release mechanism at each door or shall be provided with a redundant remote release control.

Where a mechanically operated remote release mechanism is provided as the remote release system, either a second, redundant system is required or each remote release door or lock is to be provided with a mechanically operated device at the door. The redundant operation is essential to increase the likelihood that the doors will continue to operate in the event of failure of the primary locking system. Where provided, the redundant mechanical operating door release system must also be operable from outside the residential housing area.

This provision does not apply to power-operated doors and locks that are required to have alternative systems in accordance with Section 408.4.2.

408.4.4 Relock capability. Doors remotely unlocked under emergency conditions shall not automatically relock when closed unless specific action is taken at the remote location to enable doors to relock.

So as to maintain means of egress doors in an open position during an emergency condition, once a door in a means of egress is unlocked via an emergency unlocking system, the door must not automatically relock when closed unless a specific action is taken at the remote location. The normal operation of such doors and locks is typically arranged so that the door will automatically relock upon closure.

Many electronic-locking systems operate such that the door automatically relocks upon closure for security reasons. To comply with the provisions of this section, however, a specific switch is usually provided that serves as an emergency control and does not permit the door to relock without operating it. This section does not require that doors automatically release upon activation of the fire alarm system.

408.5 Protection of vertical openings. Any vertical opening shall be protected by a shaft enclosure in accordance with Section 713, or shall be in accordance with Section 408.5.1.

This section requires that vertical openings be protected in the manner established in Section 713. The section allows compliance with Section 408.5.1 as an alternative within a housing unit, where the provisions of Section 408.5.1 for floor openings are used, then Section 408.5.2 regarding plumbing chases is also available for use in the design.

408.5.1 Floor openings. Openings in floors within a housing unit are permitted without a shaft enclosure, provided that all of the following conditions are met:

1 The entire normally occupied areas so interconnected are open and unobstructed so as to enable observation of the areas by supervisory personnel.

2 Means of egress capacity is sufficient for all occupants from all interconnected cell tiers and areas.

===== Page 0321 =====
3 The height difference between the floor levels of the highest and lowest cell tiers shall not exceed 7 m.

4 Egress from any portion of the cell tier to an exit or exit access door shall not require travel on more than one additional floor level within the housing unit.

This section is essentially an exception to the protection of vertical openings required by Section 712. It allows openings between the various floor levels and cell tiers within a single housing unit. This provision applies regardless of whether the communicating floor levels are stories or mezzanines as long as they are within the same housing unit [see Commentary Figure 408.5.1(1) and Figure 408.5.1(2)]. The following is a discussion of the conditions that must be met:

1 The areas must be sufficiently open and unobstructed so that a fire in one part will be immediately obvious to the occupants and supervisory personnel in the area. The intent of the provision is not to require open cell fronts; rather, it is to enable the staff to observe events occurring on all levels from one location. This arrangement is usually desirable from a security standpoint [see Commentary Figure 408.5.1(1)].

2 The exit capacity required is determined based on the occupant load of all floor levels exiting simultaneously. It is not unusual for most of the residents to be on the main level in the common space during periods when they are not required to be in the sleeping units (cells); therefore, this level must be able to handle the potential occupant load of all cell tier levels.

3 The height differential between the floor levels of highest and lowest cell tiers must not exceed 7 m. The limitation of 7 m expands the general code limitations on unprotected floor openings beyond two stories, because in Group I-3 it is not uncommon to have more than two interconnected levels in this open arrangement; however, the effective limitation in number of cell tiers is three. As with atrium (see Section 404), an automatic sprinkler system is required to control the spread of smoke and fire through vertical openings. Beyond the specified dimension of 7 m, effective unobstructed sight becomes less attainable [see Commentary Figure 408.5.1(2)].

To minimize the potential that a fire in the day room would block access to all exits, the exits must be arranged such that it is possible to reach an exit on each level, or from the level next above or below. This would permit, for example, a three-tiered housing unit to have exits or exit access doors out of the housing unit, which are located on the lowest level and mid-level only, or on the lowest level and the top level only. In these two scenarios, the residents have access to an exit either from the level they are on or on the next level directly above or below.

408.5.2 Shaft openings in communicating floor levels. Where a floor opening is permitted between communicating floor levels of a housing unit in accordance with Section 408.5.1, plumbing chases serving vertically stacked individual cells contained with the housing unit shall be permitted without a shaft enclosure.

Where a housing unit is designed in compliance with Section 408.5.1, this section allows plumbing chases within the same housing unit to also be unprotected where they penetrate through the floors separating cell tiers. Where opening protection is provided within a housing unit under the provisions of Section 712, the provisions of this section cannot be used in a building design.

408.6 Smoke barrier. Occupancies in Group I-3 shall have smoke barriers complying with Sections 408.7 and 709 to divide every story occupied by residents for sleeping, or any other story having an occupant load of 50 or more persons, into not fewer than two smoke compartments.

Exception: Spaces having a direct exit to one of the following, provided that the locking arrangement of the doors involved complies with the requirements for doors at the smoke barrier for the use condition involved:

1. A public way.

2. A building separated from the resident housing area by a 2-hour fire-resistance-rated assembly or 15 m of open space.

3. A secured yard or court having a holding space 15 m from the housing area that provides 0.56 m \( ^{2} \)  or more of refuge area per occupant, including residents, staff and visitors.

One of the basic premises of this section is that evacuation of a Group I-3 facility is impractical because of the need to maintain security. The security measures may also result in a delayed evacuation as compared to residential occupancies in which free egress is allowed. Therefore, it is essential to provide a refuge area to which residents can be relocated when it becomes necessary to evacuate them from the housing units. For this reason, each cell tier and each floor with an occupant load of 50 or more is required to be divided into at least two

===== Page 0322 =====
smoke compartments using smoke barriers that comply with Sections 408.8 and 709 (see commentary, Section 709). It should be noted that Section 709 provides several exceptions to smoke barriers used in Group I-3 occupancies (e.g., construction, doors and opening protectives). A further exception allowing increased glazing is permitted by the provisions of Section 408.7.

The exception provides three alternatives that are common-sense options to movement into a smoke compartment. Where the particular occupancy condition affords free, unobstructed access with no delay to the exterior, to a separate building or through a horizontal exit, then defend-in-place provisions are not needed.

408.6.1 Smoke compartments. The number of residents in any smoke compartment shall be not more than 200. The distance of travel to a door in a smoke barrier from any room door required as exit access shall be not greater than 45 m. The distance of travel to a door in a smoke barrier from any point in a room shall be not greater than 60 m.

This section defines the maximum allowable size of smoke compartments by limiting the number of residents in any single smoke compartment to 200, the maximum door-to-door distance within the compartment to 45 m and the maximum total travel distance to 60 m. These limitations are intended to enable evacuation of a smoke compartment for all of the occupants (see Commentary Figure 408.6.1).

408.6.2 Refuge area. Not less than 0.60 m \( ^{2} \)  per occupant shall be provided on each side of each smoke barrier for the total number of occupants in adjoining smoke compartments. This space shall be readily available wherever the occupants are moved across the smoke barrier in a fire emergency.

To provide adequate space for the residents evacuated to an adjacent smoke compartment, an additional 0.60 m \( ^{2} \)  per person must be readily available for the total number of occupants in the adjoining smoke compartment (see Commentary Figure 408.6.2). The 0.60 m \( ^{2} \)  criterion enables the occupants to be evacuated to the adjacent smoke compartment without delay from crowding.

In a fire emergency, any action that must be taken to unlock the space will result in a delay in moving occupants into the refuge area. As such, the code requires the refuge area to be readily available in order to preclude consideration (as a refuge area) of a space that may be normally locked and, therefore, not immediately usable.

408.6.3 Independent egress. A means of egress shall be provided from each smoke compartment created by smoke barriers without having to return through the smoke compartment from which means of egress originates.

To prevent creating a dead-end smoke compartment, exits are to be arranged so as to permit access without returning through a compartment from which egress originated. An exit is not required from within each smoke compartment [see Commentary Figure 407.5.4(1) and Figure 407.5.4(2) for acceptable and unacceptable exit arrangements].

408.7 Security glazing. In occupancies in Group I-3, windows and doors in 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707, fire partitions constructed in accordance with Section 708 and smoke barriers constructed in accordance with Section 709 shall be permitted to have security glazing installed provided that the following conditions are met.

1 Individual panels of glazing shall not exceed 0.84 m².

2 The glazing shall be protected on both sides by an automatic sprinkler system. The sprinkler system shall be designed to, when actuated, wet completely the entire surface of any glazing affected by fire.

3 The glazing shall be in a gasketed frame and installed in such a manner that the framing system will deflect without breaking (loading) the glass before the sprinkler system operates.

4 Obstructions, such as curtain rods, drapery traverse rods, curtains, drapes or similar materials shall not be installed between the automatic sprinklers and the glazing.

This section allows sprinkler-protected glazing in walls in a Group I-3 facility provided the wall is rated for 1 hour or less. As with many provisions in Section 408, this enhances the security of a facility by providing more opportunities for staff to monitor the activities of residents.

408.8 Subdivision of resident housing areas. Sleeping areas and any contiguous day room, group activity space or other common spaces where residents are housed shall be separated from other spaces in accordance with Sections 408.8.1 through 408.8.4.

Resident housing areas usually consist of sleeping areas and other contiguous common area spaces, such as day rooms or activity areas onto which sleeping areas open. The separation required by this section is intended to separate housing areas, where the occupants in those areas may be asleep, from other activity areas since people asleep are

===== Page 0323 =====
more vulnerable to a fire emergency. The separation requirements are based on the relative evacuation difficulty as determined by the occupancy condition. Sections 408.8.1 through 408.8.4 give the separation requirements for the various occupancy conditions for which separation is necessary.

408.8.1 Occupancy Conditions 3 and 4. Each sleeping area in Occupancy Conditions 3 and 4 shall be separated from the adjacent common spaces by a smoke-tight partition where the distance of travel from the sleeping area through the common space to the corridor exceeds 15 m.

A smoke-tight partition is required between the sleeping areas and common areas in Conditions 3 and 4 where the distance of travel from the sleeping area through the common area to an exit access corridor exceeds 15 m. This requirement recognizes the need to protect sleeping areas from non-sleeping areas due to the increased hazards associated with common areas, delayed recognition of fire hazards by sleeping persons and the restrictions on movement for these two occupancy conditions. Moreover, release from the sleeping area may be delayed and as such, evacuation with extended travel through a common space may not be safe. In such cases, the sleeping area will be a refuge area until the fire is controlled and the occupants in the sleeping area can be safely evacuated.

It should be noted that the provisions contained in Section 1016.2 are applicable to this circumstance, and as such, sleeping areas, including those in Group I-3 occupancies, are precluded from egressing through another sleeping area. Additionally, egress is not allowed from sleeping areas through toilet rooms.

408.8.2 Occupancy Condition 5. Each sleeping area in Occupancy Condition 5 shall be separated from adjacent sleeping areas, corridors and common spaces by a smoke-tight partition. Additionally, common spaces shall be separated from the corridor by a smoke-tight partition.

Given that movement from an occupied space in Condition 5 is even more restricted than for the other conditions, smoke-tight partitions are required to be installed between areas, sleeping areas, common spaces and the exit access corridor. Protection is provided because the staff-controlled release from the sleeping area is not as immediate as in other conditions.

408.8.3 Openings in room face. The aggregate area of openings in a solid sleeping room face in Occupancy Conditions 2, 3, 4 and 5 shall not exceed 0.077 m². The aggregate area shall include all openings including door undercuts, food passes and grilles. Openings shall be not more than 900 mm above the floor. In Occupancy Condition 5, the openings shall be closeable from the room side.

Food pass-throughs, door undercuts and grilles are a functional necessity; therefore, openings are limited in size and close to the floor. The openings are required to be close to the floor to minimize the potential for smoke to pass through the opening. By placing the opening close to the floor, smoke will not pass through a smoke-tight barrier initially; rather, there will be some time delay as the smoke layer descends to 900 mm above the floor before smoke is transmitted through such openings.

408.8.4 Smoke-tight doors. Doors in openings in partitions required to be smoke tight by Section 408.8 shall be substantial doors, of construction that will resist the passage of smoke. Latches and door closures are not required on cell doors.

Where the partition is required to be capable of resisting the passage of smoke, door openings within the enclosure are also to be protected with an assembly that is capable of resisting the passage of smoke. As with other sections of the code that address doors and walls capable of resisting the passage of smoke, application of the section requires judgment by the building official. The intent is a solid door surface without louvered openings. Door closers and latches are not required. It is anticipated that the security lock will secure the door in the closed position. A door closer can interfere with the removal of the occupants not only in an emergency but also during normal operations.

408.9 Windows buildings. For the purposes of this section, a windows building or portion of a building is one with non-openable windows, windows not readily breakable or without windows. Windows buildings shall be provided with an engineered smoke control system to provide a tenable environment for exiting from the smoke compartment in the area of fire origin in accordance with Section 909 for each windowless smoke compartment.

An engineered smoke control system through which the products of combustion can be vented is required for smoke compartments in which there are no openings. The intent of the system is to provide a tenable environment during the period it takes the occupants to egress from a smoke compartment that is the area of fire origin. As it often takes longer to evacuate a Group I-3 facility due to the locking and restricted egress paths, the maintenance of a tenable environment is essential. As

===== Page 0324 =====
defined for this section only, a windowless building is a building or portion thereof with only nonoperable windows, windows that are not readily breakable or no windows. The intent of this section is that staff must have some means to ventilate the products of combustion; therefore, where the window cannot be broken by items readily available to the staff, the area is considered windowless.

408.10 Fire alarm system. A fire alarm system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.6.3.

Fire alarm systems are required in Group I-3 facilities. See the commentary to Section 907.2.6.3 for detailed requirements for this system.

408.11 Automatic sprinkler system. Group I-3 occupancies shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6.

Automatic sprinkler systems are required in all Group I-3 facilities. See the commentary to Section 903.2.6 for detailed requirements for this system.

## SECTION 409 MOTION
PROJECTION ROOMS

409.1 General. The provisions of Sections 409.1 through 409.5 shall apply to rooms in which ribbon-type cellulose acetate or other safety film is utilized in conjunction with electric arc, xenon or other light-source projection equipment that develops hazardous gases, dust or radiation. Where cellulose nitrate film is utilized or stored, such rooms shall comply with NFPA 40.

Cellulose acetate or other safety film used in the presence of potential ignition sources, including projectors or related equipment, creates a potential hazard. The provisions of this section are intended to minimize the potential for exposure of the audience and other occupants to the hazards associated with the presence of ignition sources in close proximity to the fuel load.

Provisions are established for projection rooms in recognition of the hazards attendant to the projection of ribbon-type cellulose acetate or other safety film in such spaces.

Cellulose nitrate film presents a serious hazard because degradation under external heat below ignition temperatures causes a chemical reaction. This chemical reaction releases heat of sufficient quantity to raise the substance to ignition temperatures, resulting in spontaneous combustion. After ignition, rapid burning and the production of toxic and flammable gases takes place. If such film is used, the provisions of NPFA 40 are applicable as are the provisions of Section 306 of SBC 801.
409.1.1 Projection room required. Every motion picture machine projecting film as mentioned within the scope of this section shall be enclosed in a projection room. Appurtenant electrical equipment, such as rheostats, transformers and generators, shall be within the projection room or in an adjacent room of equivalent construction.

The projection room is to be enclosed in accordance with Section 409.2 to isolate the spaces housing the potential hazard. To minimize the potential for arcs or sparks to come in contact with the film, electrical equipment, such as rheostats, transformers and generators, should be located in a separate room. This section permits such equipment to be in the same room, but it should be arranged to minimize the potential for arcs or sparks to come in contact with the film, reducing the potential for ignition. Additional requirements for electrical equipment permitted in the projection room and requirements for non-professional equipment are given in NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401).

409.2 Construction of projection rooms. Every projection room shall be of permanent construction consistent with the construction requirements for the type of building in which the projection room is located. Openings are not required to be protected. The room shall have a floor area of not less than 7.5 m² for a single machine and not less than 3.75 m² for each additional machine. Each motion picture projector, floodlight, spotlight or similar piece of equipment shall have a clear working space of not less than 750 mm by 750 mm on each side and at the rear thereof, but only one such space shall be required between two adjacent projectors. The projection room and the rooms appurtenant thereto shall have a ceiling height of not less than 2.3 m. The aggregate of openings for projection equipment shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of the wall between the projection room and the auditorium. Openings shall be provided with glass or other approved material, so as to close completely the opening.

The projection room is to be constructed as required by the construction type of the building. Since the room dimensions are small, ventilation is provided to reduce heat buildup and accumulation of dust particles. A minimum fire-resistance rating is not required unless by other provisions of the code. Limited openings are permitted and are not required to be protected so as to facilitate the intended function of projecting the image onto the auditorium screen. Openings to the auditorium must not exceed 25 percent of the area of the

===== Page 0325 =====
wall between the projection room and the auditorium. Glass or other approved material must be provided that will completely close the opening and prevent a sharing of atmospheres with the audience or seating area.

In order to minimize the buildup of heat in any area, adequate floor space must be available. The space is required to be at least 7.5 m² in size for a single projector and an additional 3.75m² for each additional projector. The room must be of adequate size so that not less than 750 mm by 750 mm of clear working space is available on each side and behind the projectors, floodlights, spotlights and similar equipment. For adjacent equipment, a clear space of 750 mm is adequate.

Because the projection room is considered an
occupiable room, the ceiling height must not be
less than 2300 mm (see commentary, Section
1207.2).

409.3 Projection room and equipment ventilation. Ventilation shall be provided in accordance with SBC 501.

All projection rooms and the equipment located within the rooms must be properly ventilated to abate the hazards of any hot gases and smoke generated by the equipment. Further, any intense heat given off by the equipment must be directly exhausted to the exterior rather than be absorbed by the building's ventilation system. Sections 502.11.1 and 502.11.2 of SBC 501 contain requirements for projectors provided with an exhaust discharge and those without an exhaust connection.

409.3.1 Supply air. Each projection room shall be provided with adequate air supply inlets so arranged as to provide well-distributed air throughout the room. Air inlet ducts shall provide an amount of air equivalent to the amount of air being exhausted by projection equipment. Air is permitted to be taken from the outside; from adjacent spaces within the building, provided that the volume and infiltration rate are sufficient; or from the building air-conditioning system, provided that it is so arranged as to provide sufficient air when other systems are not in operation.

Separate supply (see Section 409.3.1) and exhaust (see Section 409.3.2) requirements are provided for projection rooms. Exhaust rates are specified in Section 502.11.2 of SBC 501 for projectors without exhaust connection. Sufficient air must be introduced into each projection room to allow the effects of hot gases, smoke and heat to be diluted and to provide a makeup air source for the exhausted air. Although the code does not prescriptively state where the air supply inlets are to be located, the intent is to create a well-ventilated room. Several air supply inlets should be
provided so that the entire room has adequate air changes. The amount of air supplied to each projection room must be approximately equal to the volume of air that is exhausted according to SBC 501. Makeup supply air can be obtained from any source as long as sufficient quantities are provided at all times that the exhaust system is operating.

409.3.2 Exhaust air. Projection rooms are permitted to be exhausted through the lamp exhaust system. The lamp exhaust system shall be positively interconnected with the lamp so that the lamp will not operate unless there is the required airflow. Exhaust air ducts shall terminate at the exterior of the building in such a location that the exhaust air cannot be readily recirculated into any air supply system. The projection room ventilation system is permitted to also serve appurtenant rooms, such as the generator and rewind rooms.

Another method of providing exhaust is to exhaust the room itself. This method can be used only where the projectors do not have an integral lamp exhaust system. Exhaust rates for this type of system are specified in SBC 501 based on the type of projector. The exhaust ducts for the projection room must be terminated at the exterior of the building and cannot be combined with any other exhaust or return system present in the building. The intent of this requirement is so that the hot gases, smoke and heat will not be allowed to be disbursed elsewhere in the building.

409.3.3 Projection machines. Each projection machine shall be provided with an exhaust duct that will draw air from each lamp and exhaust it directly to the outside of the building. The lamp exhaust is permitted to serve to exhaust air from the projection room to provide room air circulation. Such ducts shall be of rigid materials, except for a flexible connector approved for the purpose. The projection lamp or projection room exhaust system, or both, is permitted to be combined but shall not be interconnected with any other exhaust or return system, or both, within the building.

Projectors with an integral lamp exhaust system use air to cool the equipment during operation. The amount of air exhausted with these systems is part of the manufacturer's installation instructions. These integral exhaust systems must be directly connected to the mechanical exhaust systems. Further, the lamp exhaust system must be interconnected to the projector's power supply such that when the projector is operating, its exhaust system will be automatically activated.

409.4 Lighting control. Provisions shall be made for control of the auditorium lighting and the means of egress lighting systems of theaters from inside

===== Page 0326 =====
the projection room and from not less than one other convenient point in the building.

The projection room is usually an attended location, but it is also a likely area for a fire to originate. Lighting controls that provide adequate normal and emergency auditorium lighting must be provided in the projection room. Upon detection of a fire anywhere in the building, the operator can immediately provide adequate illumination for the occupants, egressing the auditorium. A second location for the lighting controls is also required somewhere else in the building, so that entry into the projection room is not required to provide the necessary illumination, as it could be the location of fire origin. This second control is required to be conveniently located for the staff yet inaccessible to unauthorized persons.

409.5 Miscellaneous equipment. Each projection room shall be provided with rewind and film storage facilities.

In order to keep all operations related to projection activities in the protected enclosure, rewind and film storage facilities are to be located in the projection room or in an adjacent room in accordance with Section 409.1.1.

## SECTION 410 STAGES, PLATFORMS AND TECHNICAL PRODUCTION AREAS

410.1 Applicability. The provisions of Sections 410.1 through 410.7 shall apply to all parts of buildings and structures that contain stages or platforms and similar appurtenances as herein defined.

Historically, most significant theater fires originated on the stage. The 1903 Iroquois Theater fire in Chicago serves as a vivid example of a stage fire and its potentially tragic effects 602 people lost their lives. Hazards associated with stages include combustible scenery and lighting suspended overhead; scenic elements, contents and acoustical treatment on the back and sides of the stage; technical production areas including workshops, scene docks and dressing rooms located around the stage perimeter; and storage areas and property rooms located underneath the stage.

The protection requirements set forth in this section are intended to limit the threat from stage fires to an audience and reduce the likelihood of a large fire in the stage area. These provisions include construction restrictions, automatic sprinkler systems, ventilation, separation of the stage from the audience and compartmentalization of appurtenant rooms to the stage. Special allowances are provided for galleries, gridirons, catwalks and other technical production areas. Based on historical events and the expertise of a broad range of professionals with experience in theater design, operations and fire events, a set of principles guides the requirements for theaters. These principles are summarized as follows:

The fire hazards of stages are not necessarily a function of type (legitimate, regular or thrust) but rather area and height. Accordingly, a stage area in excess of 100 m² or a height in excess of 15 m is the threshold that represents a significant potential for fuel load due to scenery and drops.

2 Stages that exceed 100 m² or the 15 m height threshold require a means of emergency ventilation.

3 Stages that exceed 100 m² and the 15 m height threshold require automatic sprinkler protection.

4 Stages and platforms are similar to floor construction; therefore, the type of construction should be consistent with that of the floor construction in the building.

5 Separation of the stage from the seating area, dressing rooms, property rooms and similar spaces is critical in order to provide a degree of fire containment.

Section 410.2 contains provisions for the construction of the stage and gallery. Stage openings, decorations, equipment and scenery are addressed in Sections 410.2.3 through 410.2.6. Stage ventilation is required in accordance with Section 410.2.7. Platforms must be constructed in accordance with Section 410.3. The construction of auxiliary stage spaces is addressed in Section 410.4. Special means of egress requirements for stages, platforms and technical production areas are established in Section 410.5. Sections 410.6 and 410.7 contain the requirements for automatic sprinkler systems and standpipes, respectively.

All parts of a building or structure that contain a stage, platform or similar appurtenance are required to comply with the provisions of this section.

410.2 Stages. Stage construction shall comply with Sections 410.2.1 through 410.2.7.

This section indicates the scope of the code provisions that apply to stage construction.

410.2.1 Stage construction. Stages shall be constructed of materials as required for floors for the type of construction of the building in which such stages are located.

Exception: Stages need not be constructed of the same materials as required for the type of construction provided that the construction complies with one of the following:

===== Page 0327 =====
1. Stages of Type IIB or IV construction with a nominal 50 mm wood deck, provided that the stage is separated from other areas in accordance with Section 410.2.4.

2. In buildings of Type IIA, IIIA and VA construction, a fire-resistance-rated floor is not required, provided that the space below the stage is equipped with an automatic sprinkler system or fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Section 903 or 904.

3. In all types of construction, the finished floor shall be constructed of wood or approved non-combustible materials. Openings through stage floors shall be equipped with tight-fitting, solid wood trap doors with approved safety locks.

Stages, most simply, are floor construction, and as such, must conform to the requirements for all other floors in the building so that the building's designated construction classification will be consistent throughout. Since wood is the material of choice for stage floors because it allows for nailing of sets and props and provides the best acoustics for dance and other performances, the code allows three exceptions to the requirement for stage construction.

Exception 1 permits stages in buildings of any construction classification to be constructed with a nominal 50 mm wood deck supported by either unprotected noncombustible construction (Type IIB) or heavy timber construction (Type IV) where the stage is separated from the audience by a proscenium wall built in accordance with Section 410.2.4. Under Exception 2, stage floors are not required to be fire-resistance rated in buildings of Types IIA, IIIA and VA where the space below the stage is equipped with an automatic sprinkler system or fire-extinguishing system installed in accordance with Section 903 or 904. In this case, the requirement for fire-resistance-rated floors is offset by the protection supported by the automatic fire-extinguishing system.

Exception 3 recognizes that stages are predominantly constructed with a finished floor of wood and identifies wood as an acceptable finish material for all construction classifications. It also permits openings in stage floors to be protected with tight-fitting solid wood doors with safety locks to secure them. The normal operation of stage trap doors does not typically allow them to have a fire-resistance rating.

410.2.1.1 Stage height and area. Stage areas shall be measured to include the entire performance area and adjacent backstage and support areas not separated from the performance area by fire-resistance-rated construction. Stage height shall be measured from the lowest point on the stage floor to the highest point of the roof or floor deck above the stage.

* As previously stated, many of the code's requirements for stages and platforms are triggered based on the volume of the stage or platform space. All of the wing areas and backstage areas are included as the stage area, unless they are separated with fire resistance-rated construction. Stage height is not the height of the opening in the proscenium wall, but the height from the stage floor to the highest horizontal assembly that encloses the stage space. It will typically include the fly gallery and fly loft above the stage.

410.2.2 Technical production areas: galleries, gridirons and catwalks. Beams designed only for the attachment of portable or fixed theater equipment, gridirons, galleries and catwalks shall be constructed of approved materials consistent with the requirements for the type of construction of the building; and a fire-resistance rating shall not be required. These areas shall not be considered to be floors, stories, mezzanines or levels in applying this code.

Exception: Floors of fly galleries and catwalks shall be constructed of any approved material.

This section identifies the components of the technical production areas located above the stage that are used to conceal movable scenery from the audience and where the operation of such scenery and other stage effects is controlled.

The normal use and operation of a stage requires that equipment, normally rigging, be installed and rearranged as production requirements vary. This equipment is normally installed by clamping or welding to the structural framing over and around the stage, making protecting the framing by encasement or membranes infeasible; hence, a fire-resistance rating is not required for these elements. In order to control the fuel load in this area, however, the code requires that all of the elements must be of approved materials consistent with the requirements of the building's construction type. The exception to this requirement is that in all cases, the floors of fly galleries and catwalks may be constructed of any approved material regardless of the building's construction type. Such spaces are generally limited in area, access is restricted to authorized personnel, and they require floor materials that will deaden

===== Page 0328 =====
sound so as not to disrupt the performance below. These auxiliary areas do not have to meet the code's requirements as another story, mezzanine level or equipment platforms.

410.2.3 Exterior stage doors. Where protection of openings is required, exterior exit doors shall be protected with fire door assemblies that comply with Section 716. Exterior openings that are located on the stage for means of egress or loading and unloading purposes, and that are likely to be open during occupancy of the theater, shall be constructed with vestibules to prevent air drafts into the auditorium.

If exterior opening protectives are required, exit discharge doors directly from the stage to the outside must be fire door assemblies in accordance with Section 716.

Since one of the major concerns is containing a stage fire to the stage area, any exterior opening from the stage that is likely to be opened during a performance is to be constructed with a vestibule to prevent air drafts into the auditorium. This vestibule requirement applies to all exterior openings that are likely to be open regardless of their intended use.

410.2.4 Proscenium wall. Where the stage height is greater than 15 m, all portions of the stage shall be completely separated from the seating area by a proscenium wall with not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance rating extending continuously from the foundation to the roof.

The protection afforded by a 2-hour fire separation and opening protection (see Section 410.2.5) is required where the stage height is greater than 15 m. Stages with a height greater than 15 m permit multiple settings and large amounts of scenery and scenic elements in dense configurations. The height may reduce the effectiveness of the suppression system and the multiple settings hung over the stage may further obstruct the suppression system and impede access to a fire originating high above the stage. Stages with a height less than 15 m do not require separation from the audience since they represent a limited fuel load potential caused by scenery, drops and curtains.

410.2.5 Proscenium curtain. Where a proscenium wall is required to have a fire-resistance rating, the stage opening shall be provided with a fire curtain complying with NFPA 80, horizontal sliding doors complying with Section 716 having a fire protection rating of not less than one hour, or an approved water curtain complying with Section 903.3.1.1 or, in facilities not utilizing the provisions of smoke-protected assembly seating in accordance with Section 1030.6.2, a smoke control system complying with Section 909 or natural ventilation designed to maintain the smoke level not less than 1.8 m above the floor of the means of egress.

Fuel loads in a stage with a height greater than 15 m most often are high, and the resulting fire is severe. In such cases, to permit the audience to evacuate the seating area without being threatened directly or indirectly by a stage fire, this section requires the proscenium opening be protected. The code specifies three options: (1) a fire curtain (complying with NFPA 80), (2) horizontal sliding doors that are fire door assemblies complying with Section 716.2.1.2, or (3) an approved water curtain. In lieu of directly protecting the opening, the theater design can provide either a smoke control system or natural ventilation designed to prevent the accumulation of smoke within the first 1.8 m above the floor. These smoke control or ventilation options are permissible only where a smoke-protected assembly seating design in accordance with Section 1030.6.2 is not utilized.

In accordance with NFPA 80, a fire curtain must be capable of preventing the passage of flame or smoke, thereby providing a certain level of protection for the audience when a stage fire occurs. It is notable that the fire curtain is not required to provide the same level of protection as is typically required for a fire door assembly. Also, since one of the goals is to protect against panic, flame and smoke must not be capable of passing through to the unexposed side of the fire curtain. The level of protection for the fire curtain is based on evacuation time of the audience. Fire curtains are designed to provide 20 minutes of protection to allow the audience to evacuate.

NFPA 80 requirements for the fire curtain include but are not limited to: testing of the fabric (NFPA 701, Test Method 2), a fire curtain sample assembly subjected to the standard fire test as specified in NFPA 251, activation (emergency and manual) and rate of closing speed. The speed of descent must be slowed for the last 2.4 m of travel in order to allow individuals on the stage to move away from the curtain and to avoid injury from being hit by the batten in the bottom pocket of the curtain. It should be noted that only stages with a height greater than 15 m are required to have a proscenium wall and curtain.

Horizontal sliding fire door assemblies can also be used to protect the opening. These doors are tested in accordance with either NFPA 252 or UL 10B. For this installation, the door must have a fire protection rating of not less than one hour. This is a longer protection period than required by the fire curtain option.

===== Page 0329 =====
Water curtains conforming with Section 903.3.1.1 are viewed as providing an equivalent degree of protection to that of a fire curtain. This, in part, recognizes that emergency ventilation is also required in accordance with Section 410.2.7, which will assist in controlling smoke movement. The duration of protection is, of course, continuous as long as the sprinkler system is in operation. Lastly, today's assembly facilities, such as arenas and theaters in the round, make the use of a traditional fire curtain impractical. As such, a smoke control system or a natural ventilation system may be utilized in lieu of methods directly protecting the stage opening, provided the special allowances for smoke-protected assembly seating are not being applied.

410.2.6 Scenery. Combustible materials used in sets and scenery shall meet the fire propagation performance criteria of Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701, in accordance with Section 806 and SBC 801. Foam plastics and materials containing foam plastics shall comply with Section 2603 and SBC 801.

This section recognizes that scenery and sets are decorative materials. As such, combustible materials used in sets and scenery must meet the fire propagation performance criteria in accordance with the provisions of NFPA 701, Section 806 and SBC 801. Section 806 references Section 2604 for specific requirements for foam plastics used as trim. It should also be noted that Section 2603 addresses the uses of foam plastics in insulation. The materials when tested in accordance with NFPA 701 must comply with the performance criteria of one of the two identified test methods. The historic “small-scale test” is no longer accepted.

410.2.7 Stage ventilation. Emergency ventilation shall be provided for stages larger than 100 m² in floor area, or with a stage height greater than 15 m. Such ventilation shall comply with Section 410.2.7.1 or 410.2.7.2.

In addition to an automatic sprinkler system, emergency ventilation is one of the key fire protection components for stages that contain large fuel loads. Stages with large areas or heights permit multiple settings and large amounts of scenery and scenic elements in dense configurations. Increased height also permits multiple settings to be hung over the stage, possibly reducing the effectiveness of the suppression system or impeding access to a fire originating high above the stage. Based on these factors and the potential hazard presented by them, stages larger than 100 m² in area or with a height greater than 15 m are required to be equipped with emergency ventilation to control smoke movement and minimize the potential for fire and smoke to spread to the seating area.

410.2.7.1 Roof vents. Two or more vents constructed to open automatically by approved heat-activated devices and with an aggregate clear opening area of not less than 5 percent of the area of the stage shall be located near the center and above the highest part of the stage area. Supplemental means shall be provided for manual operation of the ventilator. Curbs shall be provided as required for skylights in Section 2610.2. Vents shall be labeled.

Where vents are used to ventilate a stage, the code requires that there be a minimum of two vents provided for redundancy. Those vents are to be located near the center and above the highest part of the stage, since this is the point at which smoke and hot gases are likely to accumulate. The minimum aggregate clear opening area of the vents is required to be 5 percent of the floor area of the stage. The vents must open automatically by approved heat-activated devices, often fusible links, and must also be operable by a supplemental manual means. The manual means serves as a backup to the automatic detectors and permits the vent to be opened as a precaution prior to achieving the heat required to activate the heat device. The vents are to be provided with curbs as required for skylights in Section 2610.2. In addition, the vents must be labeled by an approved agency (see Section 1703.5 for further labeling requirements).

410.2.7.2 Smoke control. Smoke control in accordance with Section 909 shall be provided to maintain the smoke layer interface not less than 1.8 m above the highest level of the assembly seating or above the top of the proscenium opening where a proscenium wall is provided in compliance with Section 410.2.4.

In addition to roof vents, another option for emergency ventilation (i.e., smoke control) of stages is provided in this section. This section, in concert with the provisions contained in Section 909, provides the criteria for smoke control for stages larger than 100 m² in floor area or with a stage height greater than 15 m. In such cases, the smoke layer interface must be maintained 1.8 m above the highest level of the assembly seating or above the top of the proscenium opening where a proscenium is provided. The smoke layer is maintained 1.8 m above the proscenium opening in order to prevent smoke from entering into the audience area.

410.3 Platform construction. Permanent platforms shall be constructed of materials as

===== Page 0330 =====
required for the type of construction of the building in which the permanent platform is located. Permanent platforms are permitted to be constructed of fire-retardant-treated wood for Types I, II and IV construction where the platforms are not more than 750 mm above the main floor, and not more than one-third of the room floor area and not more than 280 m \( ^{2} \)  in area. Where the space beneath the permanent platform is used for storage or any purpose other than equipment, wiring or plumbing, the floor assembly shall be not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction. Where the space beneath the permanent platform is used only for equipment, wiring or plumbing, the underside of the permanent platform need not be protected.

This section establishes the scope of the code requirements for platform construction. A permanent platform is basically raised floor construction. As such, the construction must be consistent with that of all the floors in the building.

Permanent platforms can be of fire-retardant-treated wood in limited applications. In buildings of Type I, II or IV construction, platforms can be of fire-retardant-treated wood where they are not more than 750 mm in height, are not more than one-third of the floor area of the room and are 280 m² or less in area. A platform that meets these three size limits poses a small fire risk relative to the normal fuel load in the room. As such, the platform deck and its supporting construction can be of fire-retardant-treated wood materials. Where the platform exceeds any one of the three size limits, it must be constructed of materials consistent with the building's type of construction classification. A basic premise of Section 410.3 is that the platform must not significantly increase the fire hazard of the space or building. As such, the space beneath platforms is regulated to appropriately abate the risk. Where the space beneath a permanent platform is utilized for any purpose other than electrical wiring or plumbing, the platform is to have a 1-hour fire-resistance rating. The purpose of the fire-resistance-rating requirement is to provide some structural integrity to the platform should a fire occur in the concealed space. In the case of permanent platforms where the space beneath the platform is only used for plumbing or electrical wiring, no further protection is required since the fire risk will be minimal.

410.3.1 Temporary platforms. Platforms installed for a period of not more than 30 days are permitted to be constructed of any materials permitted by this code. The space between the floor and the platform above shall only be used for plumbing and electrical wiring to platform equipment.

Temporary platforms may be constructed of any material regardless of the building's construction classification due to their limited time of use and their normally limited size and fuel load. Because temporary platforms are permitted to be constructed of any approved material, the space beneath a temporary platform may never be used for any purpose other than electrical wiring or plumbing to the platform equipment. Such lines serving other areas may not be located beneath a temporary platform.

410.4 Dressing and appurtenant rooms. Dressing and appurtenant rooms shall comply with Sections 410.4.1 and 410.4.2.

Because stages are open to the viewing audience and typically contain a substantial fuel load, it is essential to contain fires in rooms around the stage to the room of origin; therefore, this section contains provisions for the separation of such areas from the stage and from one another.

410.4.1 Separation from stage. The stage shall be separated from dressing rooms, scene docks, property rooms, workshops, storerooms and compartments appurtenant to the stage and other parts of the building by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. The fire resistance rating shall be not less than 2 hours for stage heights greater than 15 m and not less than 1 hour for stage heights of 15 m or less.

Separation of the stage from appurtenant rooms provides a significant level of fire containment. Such containment is fundamental to limiting the spread of fire from adjacent spaces to the stage area, as well as the growth of fires in the stage area itself. The 2-hour fire-resistance rating for stages with a height greater than 15 m, such as large theatrical stages, acknowledges the significant potential for a large fuel load and is consistent with the 2-hour rating of Section 410.2.4. Although stages with a height of 15 m or less represent a limited potential fuel load, a 1-hour fire-resistance rating will provide an additional level of compartmentation in the event a fire originates at the stage (which may not be sprinkled if the stage complies with Section 410.6, Exception 2). Such stages are likely to be found in educational occupancies or meeting halls.

410.4.2 Separation from each other. Dressing rooms, scene docks, property rooms, workshops, storerooms and compartments appurtenant to the

===== Page 0331 =====
stage shall be separated from each other by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

As an additional level of protection, rooms and compartments appurtenant to the stage must be separated from one another by an approved 1-hour fire-resistance-rated fire barrier and horizontal assemblies. Rooms appurtenant to the stage (e.g., property rooms and activities with a history of fire incidents, such as scenery workshops) often have very high fuel loads. This additional level of fire containment is intended to minimize fire growth and limit fires in these areas to the room of origin.

410.5 Means of egress. Except as modified or as provided for in this section, the provisions of Chapter 10 shall apply.

The general means of egress requirements in Chapter 10 are applicable to stages, platforms and technical production areas except where modified by this section. The modifications provided in this section provide adjustments to the Chapter 10 general egress provisions because of the uniqueness of stage areas.

410.5.1 Arrangement. Where two or more exits or exit access doorways from the stage are required in accordance with Section 1006.2, no fewer than one exit or exit access doorway shall be provided on each side of a stage.

Because of the relative fire hazards associated with stages, this section requires that a minimum of one approved means of egress be provided from each side of the stage where two or more means of egress are required based on the provisions of Section 1006.2. This is intended to provide the occupants of a stage ready access to evacuate the stage area in the event of a fire. Where the occupant load of the stage is such that only one means of egress is required by Section 1006.2, then it is not necessary to provide an exit or exit access doorway on both sides of the stage.

410.5.2 Stairway and ramp enclosure. Exit access stairways and ramps serving a stage or platform are not required to be enclosed. Exit access stairways and ramps serving technical production areas are not required to be enclosed.

Exit access stairways that serve a stage, platform or technical production areas do not require enclosure due to the nature of the activities involved. These stairways are required to meet the stairway provisions in Section 1011, including handrail and guard requirements where applicable.

410.5.3 Technical production areas. Technical production areas shall be provided with means of egress and means of escape in accordance with Sections 410.5.3.1 through 410.5.3.5.

A variety of special means of egress provisions are provided for technical production areas that take into account the unique characteristics of such areas. Defined in Section 202, "Technical production areas" include all technical support areas, regardless of their traditional name (fly gallery, gridiron). The provisions of Section 410.5.3 reflect the special allowances for minimum number of means of egress, maximum travel distance, allowable exit access components and minimum travel path width. It should be noted that these provisions are also applicable to those "technical production areas" that are not necessarily associated with a stage or platform, such as those that are present at a sports arena or stadium.

410.5.3.1 Number of means of egress. Not fewer than one means of egress shall be provided from technical production areas.

Fly galleries, gridirons and other technical production areas are ordinarily occupied by a few persons at any one time who are likely to be very familiar with the stage operations. As such, these areas need only be provided with one means of egress.

410.5.3.2 Exit access travel distance. The exit access travel distance shall be not greater than 90 m for buildings without a sprinkler system and 120 m for buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

The exit access travel distance limitations reflect the limited hazard presented by technical production areas, the limited number of persons affected, and the necessary extent of such areas that would cause such distances to be reasonable.

410.5.3.3 Two means of egress. Where two means of egress are required, the common path of travel shall be not greater than 30 m.

Exception: A means of escape to a roof in place of a second means of egress is permitted.

In those cases where a second means of egress from a technical production area is required, typically where the travel distance limits of Section 410.5.3.2 cannot be met, it is necessary to limit the common path of travel to 30 m. This ensures that limited occupant travel will be necessary before the occupants have a choice of two paths that lead to the two required means of egress. The exception permits one of the means of egress to lead to the roof. The exceptions can be used only where two means of egress are required.

===== Page 0332 =====
410.5.3.4 Path of egress travel. The following exit access components are permitted where serving technical production areas:

1 Stairways.

2 Ramps.

3 Spiral stairways.

4 Catwalks.

5 Alternating tread devices.

6 Permanent ladders.

Due to the reduced hazards previously described, a variety of exit access components may be utilized throughout the means of egress serving technical production areas. In addition to stairways and ramps, the egress path may include spiral stairways as addressed in Section 1011.10, alternating tread devices as described in Section 1011.14, and permanent ladders as addressed in Section 1011.16 and Section 306.5 of SBC 501.

410.5.3.5 Width. The path of egress travel within and from technical support areas shall be not less than 560 mm.

Since the means of egress from a technical production area will not be used by the public nor will it serve a significant occupant load, it is considered acceptable that a reduced egress width be provided. The required minimum width of 560 mm is applicable to all of the exit access components serving only the technical production areas, including stairways, ramps, spiral stairways, alternating tread devices and permanent ladders, where provided.

410.6 Automatic sprinkler system. Stages shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Sprinklers shall be installed under the roof and gridiron and under all catwalks and galleries over the stage. Sprinklers shall be installed in dressing rooms, performer lounges, shops and storerooms accessory to such stages.

## Exceptions:

1. Sprinklers are not required under stage areas less than 1.2 m in clear height that are utilized exclusively for storage of tables and chairs, provided that the concealed space is separated from the adjacent spaces by Type X gypsum board not less than 16 mm in thickness.

2. Sprinklers are not required for stages 100 m² or less in area and 15 m or less in height where curtains, scenery or other combustible hangings are not retractable vertically. Combustible hangings shall be limited to a single main curtain, borders, legs and a single backdrop.
3. Sprinklers are not required within portable orchestra enclosures on stages.

Stages contain significant quantities of combustible materials stored in, around and above the stage that are located in close proximity to large quantities of lighting equipment (i.e., scenery and lighting above the stage). There also is scenery on the sides and rear of the stage; shops located along the back and sides of the stage; and storage, props, trap doors and lifts under the stage floor. This combination of fuel load and ignition sources increases the potential for a fire. As such, stages and technical production areas, such as dressing rooms, workshops and storerooms, are required to be protected with an automatic sprinkler system.

The references to Chapter 9 indicate that the sprinkler system may be designed in accordance with NFPA 13 and Section 903.3.1.1 or, where not more than 20 sprinklers are required on any single connection, a limited area sprinkler system may be used (see Section 903.3.8).

Exception 1 applies to areas less than 1200 mm in clear height under stages that are used only for the storage of tables and chairs. Because of the limited fuel load present, such areas are not required to be protected with sprinklers, provided that the concealed space is separated from all adjacent spaces by not less than 16 mm Type X gypsum board. This level of separation is intended to provide fire containment in the absence of sprinkler protection. This arrangement is often found in educational buildings where the room is used as a multipurpose room.

Exception 2 recognizes that stages 100 m² or less in area and 15 m or less in height represent a limited potential for combustibles that does not warrant the requirements for an automatic sprinkler system. The code further limits the amounts of combustible materials by not allowing any vertical retractable curtains, hangings and similar scenery elements. It should be noted, however, that although sprinkler protection is not required, the requirements of Section 410.4 still apply.

Exception 3 acknowledges the limited hazards associated with portable orchestra enclosures. These elements are temporary in nature and are intended to improve the acoustics of the stage performances. These temporary enclosures do not lend themselves to temporary sprinkler heads; therefore, none are required.

410.7 Standpipes. Standpipe systems shall be provided in accordance with Section 905.

Because of the potentially large fuel load and three-dimensional aspect of the fire hazard

===== Page 0333 =====
associated with stages greater than 100 m \( ^{2} \)  in area, a Class III wet standpipe system is required on each side of such stages. The standpipes are required to be equipped with both a 40 mm and 65 mm hose connection. The required design criteria for the standpipe system, including hoses and cabinets, is specified in Section 905.3.4.

## SECTION 411 SPECIAL AMUSEMENT AREAS

411.1 General. Special amusement areas having an occupant load of 50 or more shall comply with the requirements for the appropriate Group A occupancy and Sections 411.1 through 411.7. Special amusement areas having an occupant load of less than 50 shall comply with the requirements for a Group B occupancy and Sections 411.1 through 411.7.

Exception: Special amusement areas that are without walls or a roof and constructed to prevent the accumulation of smoke need not comply with this section.

A special amusement area is one where the egress is not readily apparent, is intentionally confounded or is not readily available (see Section 202). This section addresses the hazards associated with such use by requiring automatic fire detection (see Section 411.2), automatic sprinkler protection (see Section 411.3), alarm requirements (see Section 411.4), an emergency voice/alarm communications system (see Section 411.5) and specific means of egress lighting and marking (see Section 411.6). Additionally, only interior finish materials that meet the most stringent flame spread classification, Class A, are permitted in special amusement areas (see Section 411.7). In addition to the provisions of this section, other applicable requirements, such as means of egress (i.e., occupant load and travel distance) and building construction (i.e., type of construction, and fire-resistance ratings), apply in accordance with the appropriate assembly group classification (see Section 303.1). Special amusement areas are considered assembly uses based on the provisions of Section 303.1. Section 303.1 further specifies that a Group A classification is applicable only where the space or building's design occupant load is 50 or more. The provisions of Section 411 apply in addition to the other requirements for the appropriate assembly use, usually Group A-1 or A-3. Very small special amusement areas are not required to be classified as Group A. Where the design occupant load is less than 50, then the space or building is classified as Group B. This

acknowledges the lesser hazards associated with smaller groups of people. Although smaller buildings are classified as Group B, they must still meet the requirements of this section as special amusement areas.

Section 411 does not apply to a facility that is constructed to permit the free and immediate ventilation of the products of combustion to the outside. Such free and immediate ventilation addresses the hazard associated with many special amusement buildings relative to the rapid accumulation of smoke in a building in which the egress is not readily apparent, confusing or not readily available.

All flammable decorative materials used in special amusement areas are required to follow the provisions of SBC 801. The use of flammable and combustible materials in these types of buildings must be strictly regulated to limit the fire hazards to the building occupants (refer to Chapter 8 of SBC 801 for those restrictions).

411.2 Automatic sprinkler system. Buildings containing special amusement areas shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Where the special amusement area is temporary, the sprinkler water supply shall be of an approved temporary means.

Exception: Automatic sprinklers are not required where the total floor area of a temporary special amusement area is less than 100 m \( ^{2} \)  and the exit access travel distance from any point in the special amusement area to an exit is less than 15 m.

One protection strategy to minimize the potential hazard to occupants is to control fire development. As such, buildings containing special amusement areas are required to be protected with an automatic sprinkler system. Where the special amusement area is small [less than 100 m \( ^{2} \) ] and the travel distance to exits is short [less than 15 m] and only used on a temporary basis (such as at Halloween), automatic sprinklers are not required. In such buildings, it is anticipated that automatic fire detection and the resulting alarm (see Section 411.4) will provide additional egress time for the limited number of occupants.

Since many structures used for special amusement areas are portable or temporary, it is not practical to require a permanent, automatic sprinkler water supply as required in Chapter 9. Instead, the building official may allow a reliable, temporary water supply. There are other unique design considerations for the sprinkler system, such as drainage and pipe and sprinkler support, which may be necessary.

===== Page 0334 =====
because of the movement of the structures from one location to another.

411.3 Automatic smoke detection. Buildings containing special amusement areas shall be equipped with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section 907.2.12.

The automatic smoke detection system is required to provide early warning of fire and must comply with Section 907.2.12. The detection system is required regardless of the presence of staff in the building.

411.4 Emergency voice/alarm communications system. An emergency voice/alarm communications system shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.12.

An integral part of the fire protection systems required for buildings with special amusement areas is an emergency voice/alarm communications system. This system can serve as a public address system to alert the building occupants of the fire emergency and provide them with the proper emergency instructions. The system must be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 and must be heard throughout the entire building. Upon activation, the system must sound an alert tone followed by the necessary voice instructions. These instructions can save valuable time in directing the building occupants to quickly and safely egress.

411.5 Puzzle room exiting. Puzzle room exiting shall comply with one of the following:

1 Exiting in accordance with Chapter 10.

2 An alternative design approved by the building official.

3 Exits shall be open and readily available upon activation by the automatic fire alarm system, automatic sprinkler system, and a manual control at a constantly attended location.

Because puzzle rooms are designed to disorient the occupant or disguise the exit route, this section was added to provide safe exiting requirements in an emergency with flexibility to maintain the appeal of this special amusement area. Item 3 just requires that the exit route, if disguised or hidden, is made easily identified and accessed when the fire alarm is activated.

411.6 Exit marking. Exit signs shall be installed at the required exit or exit access doorways serving special amusement areas in accordance with this section and Section 1013. Approved directional exit markings shall be provided. Where mirrors, mazes or other designs are utilized that disguise the path of egress travel such that they are not apparent, approved and listed low-level exit signs that comply with Section 1013.5, and directional path markings listed in accordance with UL 1994, shall be provided and located not more than 200 mm above the walking surface and on or near the path of egress travel. Such markings shall become visible in an emergency. The directional exit marking shall be activated by the automatic smoke detection system and the automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 907.2.12.

During normal operation of a special amusement area, the illumination and marking of the egress path may not be adequate to allow for prompt egress from the area. This section clearly reminds the reader that exit signs must still be provided in special amusement areas at the required exit or exit access doors, and that signs must comply with the requirements of Section 1013. As special amusement spaces quite often consist of low-level lighting and/or spaces and features that can confuse a person's orientation, exit signs are required regardless of the number of required means of egress. Where obstructions and confusion may still exist because of the nature of the facility, low-level exit signs and directional path markings (listed in accordance with UL 1994) must be provided and located not higher than 200 mm above the walking surface in order to direct the occupants toward the exits. In an emergency, activation of the automatic smoke detection system or automatic sprinkler system must activate the directional exit markings to become visible.

411.6.1 Photoluminescent exit signs. Where photo luminescent exit signs are installed, activating light source and viewing distance shall be in accordance with the listing and markings of the signs.

Photo luminescent exit signs operate due to exposure to specific sources of light as indicated in their listing and labeling. In some situations, not all types of photo luminescent exit signs can be used and, as such, the normal lighting levels in the area where such exit signs are to be installed must be assessed to verify compatibility.

411.7 Interior finish. The interior finish in special amusement areas shall be Class A in accordance with Section 803.1.

All interior finish materials must be tested for surface-burning performance in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Due to the potential for fire to spread quickly in the relatively confined spaces in these uses, only Class A materials are permitted to be used as interior finish in a special amusement area. These special amusement areas are not permitted the one classification reduction that would normally be allowed by Table 803.13 in a sprinklered building.

===== Page 0335 =====
## SECTION 412 AIRCRAFT-RELATED OCCUPANCIES

412.1 General. Aircraft-related occupancies shall comply with Sections 412.1 through 412.7 and SBC 801.

Section 412 provides specific details for the construction of the full range of aircraft-related occupancies from residential aircraft hangars to those handling large commercial aircraft, as well as helistops and heliports. This section contains code requirements for some very specialized occupancies related to aircraft. Aircraft pose some of the same hazards associated with motor vehicles; therefore, some of the same requirements are applicable for life and fire safety issues.

The unique issues surrounding aircraft traffic control towers are addressed in Section 412.2. Sections 412.3 and 412.4 are composed of code provisions that regulate both commercial and residential aircraft hangars. The overall building fire load for hangars is typically low, because the considerable amounts of metal in aircraft absorb heat and provide limited combustibility to sustain a fire. An aircraft fire, however, can be quite severe because of the flammability of the fuel contained in its tanks. Provisions for regulating the exterior walls, basements and floor surfaces of commercial aircraft hangars are specified along with separation and fire suppression requirements. Section 412.5 addresses specialized hangars that are used for the painting of aircraft with flammable materials. Just as Section 416 contains limitations and requirements for the application of flammable finishes, so does Section 412.5 for aircraft paint hangars. Use and occupancy requirements commensurate with the hazards are provided, including construction, fire protection systems and necessary ventilation.

Section 412.6 addresses the unique and very large facilities where aircraft are manufactured. The size of such buildings where both commercial and military aircraft are assembled have such large footprints that traditional exit access travel distances are unrealistic.

Lastly, Section 412.7 identifies those code requirements applicable to helicopter landing and service ports. Although the code relies heavily on the requirements of NFPA 418 for helicopters and helistops located on the roofs of buildings and structures, there are provisions applicable for all locations. This section contains requirements for size limitations, design and means of egress.

There are additional requirements applicable to these occupancies in Chapter 20 of SBC 801, Aviation Facilities, as well as other chapters of SBC 801.

412.2 Airport traffic control towers. The provisions of Sections 414.2.1 through 412.2.6 shall apply to airport traffic control towers occupied only for the following uses:

1 Airport traffic control cab.

2 Electrical and mechanical equipment rooms.

3 Airport terminal radar and electronics rooms.

4 Office spaces incidental to the tower operation.

5 Lounges for employees, including sanitary facilities.

Section 412.2 regulates airport traffic control towers. Although these structures do not house aircraft, they are included in this section for consistency. These structures pose unique hazards to occupants because of their height and the fact that they may have limited routes of escape. This section contains requirements governing the permitted types of construction and necessary egress along with the needed fire protection systems. This section applies only to airport traffic control towers that are limited to uses exclusively related to air traffic control purposes and the uses found in this section. Where the building contains uses not in this section, then the building must comply with the balance of SBC 201, and this section (412) cannot be applied.

Airport traffic control towers are structures designed for highly specific functions. These functions include the housing of vital electronic equipment, providing an elevated structure for electronic communication, such as radar, and providing an observation area that allows an unobstructed view of the ground and airspace for air traffic controllers. This functional configuration creates special hazards, including limited means of egress, limited firefighting access to upper floors and vulnerability to exposure fires. The intent of the code is to restrict the fuel load by limiting the structure construction to primarily noncombustible materials, minimizing combustible contents and potential ignition sources by limiting the use of the structure, providing automatic fire detection and sprinkler systems, and requiring adequate and reliable egress. Some provisions of Section 412 apply only where the control tower is restricted to a single means of egress. Regardless of the height of control towers, those towers regulated under Section 412 are not considered high-rise buildings, and therefore they are exempt from Section 403. However, many of the provisions in Section 412.2 mirror provisions of Section 403.

Standby or emergency power is not specified in Section 412 for aircraft control towers.

===== Page 0336 =====
However, many of the systems in the tower such as means of egress illumination, smokeproof enclosures, the elevator and the fire detection system will need standby or emergency power as specified in those provisions.

412.2.1 Construction. The construction of airport traffic control towers shall comply with the provisions of Sections 412.2.1.1 through 412.2.1.3

This section routes the user to three construction limitations unique to control towers.

412.2.1.1 Type of construction. Airport traffic control towers shall be constructed to comply with the height limitations of Table 412.2.1.1.

The height of aircraft control towers is limited as specified in Table 412.2.1.1. A maximum height for five construction types is set. Types IV and V construction are not allowed. The height limitations of Section 504 do not apply to aircraft control towers.

Table 412.2.1.1 functions the same as Table 504.3. Height of control towers is based on meter only and not on stories, and the actual height is measured from grade plane to the finished floor of the cab or the highest occupied level. "Cab" is the term of art for control towers and applies to the room at the top of a control tower where the controllers do their work. The number of stories is not a criterion, since many of the towers do not have occupied stories for the entire height between the ground and the occupiable level at the top. Where the type of construction is known, the allowable height is given by the corresponding value in the second column. Where the height is known, the permitted construction types are determined from the first column. Construction types not included in the table are not permitted.

412.2.1.2 Structural integrity of interior exit stairways and elevator hoistway enclosures Enclosures for interior exit stairways and elevator hoistway enclosures shall comply with Section 403.2.2 in airport traffic control towers where the control cab is located more than 23 m above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.

This provision simply says that where the control tower is of the height that defines a high-rise building, then stairway enclosure and hoistway integrity should also meet high-rise building standards.

412.2.1.3 Sprayed fire-resistant materials (SFRM) The bond strength of the SFRM installed in airport traffic control towers shall be in accordance with Section 403.2.3 where the control cab is located more than 23 m above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
* Similar to Section 412.2.1.2, this provision simply says that where the control tower is of the height that defines a high-rise building, then the increased bond strength for SFRM provided in Section 403.2.3 will apply to control tower construction as well.

412.2.2 Means of egress and evacuation. The means of egress in airport traffic control towers shall comply with Sections 412.2.2.1 through 412.2.2.3.

This section directs the code user to three means of egress provisions specific to control towers.

412.2.2.1 Stairways. Stairways in airport traffic control towers shall be in accordance with Section 1011. Exit stairways shall be smokeproof enclosures complying with one of the alternatives provided in Section 909.20.

Exception: Stairways in airport traffic control towers are not required to comply with Section 1011.12.

In general, stairways are to comply with the stairway provisions of Chapter 10. Specifically, they are required to be within smokeproof enclosures. The only stairway provision that does not apply to control tower stairways is 1011.12, which would require a stairway to the roof. The whole point of control towers is to have a 360-degree view. Pushing a stairway to the roof through the cab of the control tower would defeat the purpose of the cab.

412.2.2.2 Exit access. From observation levels, airport traffic control towers shall be permitted to have a single means of exit access for a distance of travel not greater than 30 m. Exit access stairways from the observation level need not be enclosed.

Again, the intent of the control tower is visibility of the aircraft and the airfield. It is essential to not have construction, such as a stairway enclosure, interrupting vision. Therefore, from the cab of the tower (the observation level) to an exit enclosure, a single exit access travel distance of 30 m is allowed and would include the travel down an unenclosed stairway. Where the tower has two exit stairways, providing only a single means of exit access should not be needed.

412.2.2.3 Number of exits. Not less than one exit stairway shall be permitted for airport traffic control towers of any height provided that the occupant load per floor is not greater than 15 and the area per floor does not exceed 140 m².

Where a tower has two exit stairways, this section does not apply. The code recognizes that the benefit of a second exit in a tower-type structure is greatly reduced where the two exits would be in very close proximity, as would

===== Page 0337 =====
occur for towers with a small cab. Larger cabs that one would expect at larger airports such as O'Hare in Chicago and Los Angeles International would more easily be able to be provided with two exit stairways.

Therefore, for towers with a small cab (observation level) with limited area per floor and limited number of occupants, only one exit is required per floor provided that the occupant load of each floor is 15 or less.

412.2.2.3.1 Interior finish. Where an airport traffic control tower is provided with only one exit stairway, interior wall and ceiling finishes shall be either Class A or Class B.

Typically, rooms and spaces in most occupancies can have Class C finishes. Where egress is limited to one stairway as permitted in Section 412.2.2.3, the finished surfaces of the control tower cab and other interior spaces must have safer finishes. This is not applicable to just the stairway, but to the spaces that only have access to a single stairway.

412.2.2.3.2 Exit separation Where an airport traffic control tower is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and two exits are required, the exit separation distance required by Section 1007 shall be not less than one-fourth of the length of the maximum overall dimension of the area served.

For cabs over 140 m², two means of egress are required (see commentary, Section 412.2.2.3). Where the design requires two exits from the cab, they must be separated by not less than one-fourth of the maximum diagonal of the area served. This assumes an automatic sprinkler system is provided. Such systems are required in any tower exceeding 10.5 m.

412.2.3 Emergency systems The detection, alarm and emergency systems of airport traffic control towers shall comply with Sections 412.2.3.1 through 412.2.3.3.

This section directs the user to three emergency system requirements for airport traffic control towers.

412.2.3.1 Automatic smoke detection systems Airport traffic control towers shall be provided with an automatic smoke detection system installed in accordance with Section 907.2.22.

To ensure early fire detection and to alert the occupants to egress the building during the incipient stage of a fire event, an automatic smoke detection system is required in accordance with Section 907.2.22. Section 907.2.22.1 applies specifically to towers where sprinklers are provided and there are at least two means of egress. Where there is only a single means of egress, Section 907.2.22.2 also applies to towers that are not sprinkler protected. Only towers of a height of less than 10.5 m would be without sprinklers (see Section 412.2.4).

412.2.3.2 Fire command center A fire command center shall be provided in airport traffic control towers where the control cab is located more than 23 m above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. The fire command center shall comply with Section 911.

Exceptions:

1. The fire command center shall be located in the airport control tower or an adjacent contiguous building where building functions are interdependent.

2. The room shall be not less than  \( 14 \, m^{2} \)  in area with a minimum dimension of  \( 3000 \, mm \) .

3. The following features shall not be required in an airport traffic control tower fire command center:

3.1. Emergency voice/alarm control unit.

3.2. Public address system.

3.3. Status indicators and controls for the air distributions centers.

3.4. Generator supervision devices, manual start and transfer features.

3.5. Elevator emergency or standby power switches where emergency or standby power is provided.

This section requires a fire command center for towers where the cab is more than 23 m above the fire department's lowest access point. This section relies on Section 911 for minimum command center design and equipment; however, some significant exceptions are provided. These recognize these unique buildings with limited occupant load and often a limited footprint. Therefore, the command center can be in a different building that is adjacent to the tower. The room still needs to be at least 14 m² in area. Exception 3 exempts control tower fire command centers from five features required in a typical command center.

412.2.3.3 Smoke removal Smoke removal in airport traffic control towers shall be provided in accordance with Section 403.4.7.

Once again, the control tower provisions rely on high-rise provisions. In this case, smoke removal as required in Section 403.4.7 must be provided for all air traffic control towers, regardless of height.

412.2.4 Automatic sprinkler system. Where an occupied floor is located more than 10.5 m above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, airport traffic control towers shall be equipped with

===== Page 0338 =====
an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

Sprinkler systems are required for all towers being constructed under Section 412 once there is an occupied floor above 10.5 m. This occupied floor could be the cab itself. This height was selected because shorter towers should be reachable by ladders typically found at rural fire stations and smaller airports. These are also the types of airports that would have the shorter towers.

412.2.4.1 Fire pump room. Fire pumps shall be located in rooms that are separated from all other areas of the building by 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Exception: Separation is not required for fire pumps physically separated in accordance with NFPA 20.

This matches similar provisions required of high-rise buildings, but this requirement is not specific to high-rise heights. The engineering of the sprinkler system and the local water pressure will dictate whether fire pumps will be needed in a given design. It could even be required for a shorter tower such as 13.5 m if the local (or site) water supply system does not have adequate pressure.

412.2.5 Protection of elevator wiring and cables
Wiring and cables serving elevators in airport
traffic control towers shall be protected in
accordance with Section 3007.8.1.

This provision is intended to increase the probability of a functioning elevator to aid fire fighters in the event of a fire and to increase the probability that the facility can be rapidly returned to service after a minor fire incident. This section provides a simple reference to the requirements governing fire service access elevators. The protection applies to control towers, regardless of height.

412.2.5.1 Elevators for occupant evacuation. Where provided in addition to an exit stairway, occupant evacuation elevators shall be in accordance with Section 3008.

Use of an occupant evacuation elevator is an option for any tower design. It cannot substitute for any required stairway.

412.2.6 Accessibility. Airport traffic control towers shall be accessible except as specified in Section 1104.4.

Airport traffic control towers are not required to have an accessible route to either the cab or the floor immediately below the cab (see Section 1104.4, Exception 3). Other areas of the control tower are typically employee workstations, which must be connected by an accessible route so that such stations can be approached, entered and exited (see Sections 1103.2.2 and 1104.3.1).

412.3 Aircraft hangars. Aircraft hangars shall be in accordance with Sections 412.3.1 through 412.3.6.

The requirements of Section 412.3 address commercial (or nonresidential) aircraft hangars. It should be noted that most commercial aircraft hangars will not be limited in height in terms of meters (see Section 504.1) or in area (see Section 507) based on the presence of an automatic sprinkler system. All commercial aircraft hangars, however, are regulated with regard to exterior wall fire-resistance ratings, basement limitations, floor surface construction requirements, heating equipment separation and finishing restrictions. All of these provisions serve to abate the hazards associated with large aircraft and their integral fuel tanks to acceptable fire safety levels.

412.3.1 Exterior walls. Exterior walls located less than 9 m from lot lines, or a public way shall have a fire-resistance rating not less than 2 hours.

To abate the hazards of a fire condition from spreading from a commercial aircraft hangar to adjacent buildings and structures, the code requires exterior walls that are located less than 9 m from lot lines or public ways to have fire-resistance-rated construction of not less than 2 hours. Fire-resistance-rated exterior walls permit the fire department additional time and protection as it attempts to take control of a fire situation in a hangar located less than 9 m from lot lines or public ways.

412.3.2 Basements. Where hangars have basements, floors over basements shall be of Type IA construction and shall be made tight against seepage of water, oil or vapors. There shall not be openings or communication between basements and the hangar. Access to basements shall be from outside only.

As part of the hangar requirements, the use and separation of any basement levels are rigidly controlled. A fire in the main level of a hangar could pose a severe hazard not only to the occupants of basements but also to the fire department itself. The floor/ceiling assembly located between the hangar and the first basement level below must be of Type IA construction. With a floor of 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction along with the supporting construction, a fire on the main level should be contained. Not only is the floor construction required to be rated, but it must be properly sealed or otherwise made waterproof. This requirement prevents the chances of a fire or liquids and vapors from seeping into the floor.

===== Page 0339 =====
construction and leaking into the basement level. Further, the code prohibits any openings or access between the main level of the hangar and the basement level. This would include fire-resistance-rated shafts. Any opening into the basement has to be made from the exterior of the structure via areaway construction.

412.3.3 Floor surface. Floors shall be graded and drained to prevent water or fuel from remaining on the floor. Floor drains shall discharge through an oil separator to the sewer or to an outside vented sump.

Exception: Aircraft hangars with individual lease spaces not exceeding 185 m² each in which servicing, repairing or washing is not conducted and fuel is not dispensed shall have floors that are graded toward the door but shall not require a separator.

These provisions go hand in hand with the waterproof requirements of Section 412.3.2. The floors of all hangars must be positively sloped to prevent standing liquids. This requirement is not only for personnel safety but also to minimize the effects of any spilled flammable liquids. Floor drains, where provided, must discharge their contents into an oil separator or an outside sump. This prevents the flammable liquids from entering the jurisdiction's sewer system and causing additional hazards.

An exception has been included for those commercial aircraft hangars that are divided into individual tenant or lease spaces. Hangars with tenant or lease spaces of  \( 185 \, m^{2} \)  or less in area do not pose the same overall hazard. The likelihood of all the aircraft being used at the same time is remote; therefore, the hazard of ponding water or spilled fuel is remote. The floor surfaces of small aircraft hangar tenant or lease spaces only need to be sloped toward the main exterior wall openings. It is imperative that no other servicing, repair work or aircraft washing is done and that no fuel dispensing can occur in these small tenant lease spaces.

412.3.4 Heating equipment. Heating equipment shall be placed in another room separated by 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. Entrance shall be from the outside or by means of a vestibule providing a two-doorway separation.

Exceptions:

1. Unit heaters and vented infrared radiant heating equipment suspended not less than 3 m above the upper surface of wings or engine enclosures of the highest aircraft that are permitted to be housed in the hangar need not be located in a separate room provided that they are mounted not less than 2.4 m above the floor in shops, offices and other sections of the hangar communicating with storage or service areas.

2. Entrance to the separated room shall be permitted by a single interior door provided that the sources of ignition in the appliances are not less than 450 mm above the floor.

As part of the special use and occupancy requirements for commercial aircraft hangars, all possible ignition sources must be controlled and isolated. Specifically, all heating equipment must be located in rooms that are separated from the main areas where the aircraft are parked. This separation (both fire barrier walls and horizontal assemblies) must be 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction. Although not explicitly stated, all openings through the rated walls must be protected. Doors connecting the heating equipment rooms and the main hangar area must be done with a vestibule or airlock arrangement such that one must pass through two doors prior to entering the other room. Again, this is done to minimize the possibility of any spilled flammable liquids and the resulting vapors from coming in contact with the ignition sources of the heating equipment.

Two exceptions to the separation requirements are provided. Unit heaters or vented infrared radiant heating equipment that is carefully located high above not only the floor surfaces but also the fuel tanks and engine compartments of the aircraft pose little risk. An allowance is also made where the heating equipment is located at least 450 mm above the floor of the separated room. In such a case, the vestibule/airlock arrangement with a double door system is not required and can be done with just a single door. Where either exception is used, care must be taken by the building and fire officials that these special stipulations and conditions are part of the certificate of occupancy.

412.3.5 Finishing. The process of “doping,” involving use of a volatile flammable solvent, or of painting, shall be carried on in a separate detached building equipped with automatic fire-extinguishing equipment in accordance with Section 903.

Any application of spraying or “doping” of flammable finishes or solvent treatments to aircraft is prohibited within the hangar. These types of operations must be done in a separate detached building that is provided with an automatic fire-extinguishing system. Although not specifically stated here, the intent of the

===== Page 0340 =====
code is to treat those types of buildings as aircraft paint hangars in accordance with Section 412.5.

Doping is a type of lacquer used to protect, waterproof and make taut cloth surfaces of airplane wings. It is used on lighter-than-air, ultra-light and some light aircraft. It is essentially painting on fabric. Doping is not used on metallic surfaces; however, the use of flammable paints is also addressed in this section. Where flammable finishes are applied, the process must occur in a separate building not attached to the hangar. Because the code text refers to Section 903, the intent is for an automatic sprinkler system to be installed, unless otherwise approved.

412.3.6 Fire suppression. Aircraft hangars shall be provided with a fire suppression system designed in accordance with NFPA 409, based on the classification for the hangar given in

TABLE 412.3.6.

Exception: Where a fixed base operator has separate repair facilities on site, Group II hangars operated by a fixed base operator used for storage of transient aircraft only shall have a fire suppression system, but the system is exempt from foam requirements.

To minimize the fire hazards associated with aircraft hangars, most hangars are required to be protected with a fire suppression system. Where required, the fire suppression system must be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 409, which requires fire suppression based on the type and construction of, and the activities in, a given hangar. In the standard, the suppression requirements are broken down based on three categories: Group I, Group II and Group III.

TABLE 412.3.6 designates which group designation applies to various sizes of fire areas within a hangar and the type of construction. For example, a hangar that is 2600 m² in Type IIB construction is a Group II hangar. Group I and II hangars are required to have fire suppression as specified in NFPA 409. In general, Group III hangars are exempt from providing fire suppression unless one or more of the hazardous operations listed in Section 412.3.6.1 occur within the hangar. In these situations, fire suppression based on the appropriate portion of the standard for either Group I or II is required.

The exception would not require a foam system for Group II hangers where the hangar is essentially a parking garage for transient aircraft. The exception would likely only be applicable at a larger airport facility that has multiple hangars and separate hangars for repair operations.

See

TABLE 412.3.6.

As discussed, Table 412.3.6 simply determines the hangar classification to which the fire suppression system must be designed in accordance with NFPA 409. This is based on the construction type of each building and its floor area. Table 412.3.6, Note a indicates that regardless of size or construction type, any hangar with a door opening greater than 8.5 m high must have a fire suppression system as required for a Group I hangar. Note c provides a Group IV designation for any hangar located in a membrane structure.

412.3.6.1 Hazardous operations. Any Group III aircraft hangar according to

TABLE 412.3.6 that contains hazardous operations including, but not limited to, the following shall be provided with a Group I or II fire suppression system in accordance with NFPA 409 as applicable:

1 Doping.

2 Hot work including, but not limited to, welding, torch cutting and torch soldering.

3 Fuel transfer.

4 Fuel tank repair or maintenance not including defueled tanks in accordance with NFPA 409, inserted tanks or tanks that have never been fueled.

5 Spray finishing operations.

6 Total fuel capacity of all aircraft within the unsprinkled single fire area in excess of 6000 L.

7 Total fuel capacity of all aircraft within the maximum single fire area in excess of 28000 L for a hangar with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1

Any of the operations listed in Section 412.3.6.1 that are occurring in a Group III hangar will require, under NFPA 409, some level of fire suppression. Doping is clarified in Section 412.3.5.

412.3.6.2 Separation of maximum single fire areas. Maximum single fire areas established in accordance with hangar classification and construction type in

TABLE 412.3.6 shall be separated by 2-hour fire walls constructed in accordance with Section 706. In determining the maximum single fire area as set forth in

TABLE 412.3.6, ancillary uses that are separated from aircraft servicing areas by a fire barrier of not less than 1 hour, constructed in accordance with Section 707, shall not be included in the area.

The classification of aircraft hangars for fire suppression purposes is based on the hangar's

===== Page 0341 =====
type of construction and fire area size. Fire area size is based on the aggregate floor area bounded by exterior walls and 2-hour fire walls where provided. For the purposes of hangar classification, ancillary uses located within the fire area are not required to be included in the fire area size provided they are separated from the aircraft servicing area by minimum 1-hour fire barriers.

Many times there are ancillary areas associated with an aircraft hangar, such as offices, maintenance shops and storage rooms. Since the fire suppression requirements of NFPA 409 are primarily for the protection of aircraft within the storage and servicing area, inclusion of the floor area of the ancillary spaces into the fire suppression criteria is considered unnecessary. The fire protection requirements in the ancillary areas are considered to be less extensive than those required for the aircraft servicing and storage areas. Therefore, their inclusion in the application of

TABLE 412.3.6 for fire area size is not required where a limited degree of fire separation is provided.

In order to be exempted from the fire area calculation within the aircraft hangar, it is necessary that the ancillary areas be separated from the aircraft storage and servicing areas by minimum 1-hour fire barriers. The 1-hour requirement intends to provide an acceptable fire separation without the creation of additional fire areas that would require separation by 2-hour fire walls.

412.4 Residential aircraft hangars. Residential aircraft hangars shall comply with Sections 412.4.1 through 412.4.5.

This section of the code contains provisions that account for small, limited-size aircraft hangars that are truly accessory and auxiliary to a dwelling unit. Housing developments located along or adjacent to small-scale airports are the most obvious application of these code requirements. As part of the scoping requirement of this section, the residential aircraft hangar must meet all of the criteria listed in its definition in Section 202. A hangar that exceeds the limitations must then meet the provisions of Section 412.3. Included in the code requirements are fire separation from the adjacent residence, adequate means of egress, smoke detection and alarms, independent mechanical and plumbing systems, and height and area limitations.

412.4.1 Fire separation. A hangar shall not be attached to a dwelling unless separated by a fire barrier having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour. Such separation shall be continuous from the foundation to the underside of the roof and unpierced except for doors leading to the dwelling unit. Doors into the dwelling unit shall be equipped with self-closing devices and conform to the requirements of Section 716 with a noncombustible raised sill not less than 100 mm in height. Openings from a hangar directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted.

A residential aircraft hangar can either be a standalone detached structure or attached to the residential dwelling. If the hangar is in close proximity or attached to the dwelling, it must then be separated with 1-hour fire-resistance-rated fire barriers. This fire separation must be continuous from the floor slab up to the roof sheathing. The only openings permitted in the fire separation are normal access doors. Windows or other vent openings are prohibited, as are any openings between the hangar and the bedrooms of the dwelling. The doors must have a 3/4-hour opening protective fire protection rating in accordance with Table 716.1(2). A 100 mm high noncombustible sill is required at the door along with a self-closing device. All of these fire separation requirements serve to isolate the fire hazards associated with the hangar from the occupants of the dwelling, similar to a private garage.

412.4.2 Egress. A hangar shall provide two means of egress. One of the doors into the dwelling shall be considered as meeting only one of the two means of egress.

The hangar must be provided with two separate and remotely located means of egress. This redundancy provides persons with an alternative means of escaping a fire in the hangar. One of the means of egress can be the access door into the adjacent dwelling unit. The other means of egress could be the aircraft entrance door subject to the requirements of Sections 1010.1.1 and 1010.1.2 regarding door size and swing, respectively.

412.4.3 Smoke alarms. Smoke alarms shall be provided within the hangar in accordance with Section 907.2.22.

A smoke alarm is required in the hangar space in accordance with Section 907.2.22. Similar to the smoke alarms required in each and every bedroom, in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and in each and every story of the dwelling, the hangar smoke alarm must be interconnected such that one alarm will activate all other alarms. An early detection and warning alert is essential to abate the hazards of an aircraft hangar located adjacent to a residence.

412.4.4 Independent systems. Electrical, mechanical and plumbing drain, waste and vent

===== Page 0342 =====
(DWV) systems installed within the hangar shall be independent of the systems installed within the dwelling. Building sewer lines shall be permitted to be connected outside the structures.

Exception: Smoke detector wiring and feed for electrical subpanels in the hangar.

To maintain the fire separation requirements of Section 412.4.1, the only openings permitted are normal access doors. Likewise, the mechanical and plumbing systems for the hangar must be independent of the systems within the residential house. The plumbing drain or waste line could discharge into its own building sewer line that then connects to the house's building sewer line. This connection must be done outside of both the house and the hangar. Electrical wiring serving as the feed for the subpanels in the hangar is permitted to penetrate the fire separation along with the wiring for the smoke alarm required by Section 412.4.3 and the necessary interconnection with the other interior alarms.

412.4.5 Height and area limits. Residential aircraft hangars shall be not greater than 185 m \( ^{2} \)  in area and 6 m in building height.

As stated in the definition in Section 202, the residential aircraft hangar is limited to 185 m \( ^{2} \)  in area and 6 m in building height. These limits control the fire hazard associated with such a use. The type and number of aircraft stored in the hangar are not limited. Since the hangar is considered part of the residential use, it can be constructed of any materials that are permitted for the house, including wood-frame construction.

412.5 Aircraft paint hangars. Aircraft painting operations shall be conducted in an aircraft paint hangar that complies with the provisions of Sections 412.5.1 through 412.5.8. Buildings and structures, or parts thereof, used for the application of flammable finishes shall comply with the applicable provisions of Section 416.

This section provides requirements for aircraft-related structures that exceed normal hangar storage purposes. The painting or cleaning of all aircraft with flammable liquids must be carefully controlled in an aircraft paint hangar. To determine the applicability of these requirements, the building owner must provide a complete list of all flammable liquids intended to be used in the building along with their anticipated quantities. Where the amounts exceed the maximum allowable quantities per control area, then the building must be classified as an aircraft paint hangar. See Table 307.1(1) and Section 414.2 for further discussion of the maximum allowable quantities per control area of hazardous materials.

412.5.1 Occupancy classification. Aircraft paint hangars shall be classified in accordance with the provisions of Section 307.1. Aircraft paint hangars shall comply with the applicable requirements of this code and SBC 801 for such occupancy.

Similar to any other building containing hazardous materials in excess of the maximum allowable quantities per control area, the building or structure must be classified as Group H. Because of the flammable liquids present, the aircraft paint hangar is classified as Group H-2. Based on the equivalent risk theory, the requirements of Section 412.5 and other applicable portions of the code and SBC 801 must be followed for this Group H-2 occupancy.

412.5.2 Construction. The aircraft paint hangar shall be of Type I or II construction.

All aircraft paint hangars must be constructed as a Type I or II building. Special allowable height modifications are provided in Section 504.1 for aircraft paint hangars along with special area limitations in Section 507.10, where these modifications are not applicable, then the height and area limitations of Table 504.3, Table 504.4 and Table 506.2 for a Group H-2 structure must be used. The requirement for noncombustible construction limits the fuel load that is added to the occupancy contents by the structure.

412.5.3 Spray equipment cleaning operations. Spray equipment cleaning operations shall be conducted in a liquid use, dispensing and mixing room.

The cleaning and maintenance of spray equipment is limited to a liquid use, dispensing and mixing room. This section works in conjunction with Section 412.5.4.

412.5.4 Operations. Only those flammable liquids necessary for painting operations shall be permitted in quantities less than the maximum allowable quantities per control area in Table 307.1(1). Spray equipment cleaning operations exceeding the maximum allowable quantities per control area in Table 307.1(1) shall be conducted in a liquid use, dispensing and mixing room.

To lessen the likelihood of a fire in the actual painting or aircraft cleaning areas, only flammable liquids necessary for those operations are permitted. This requirement for separation and segregation of the different operations reduces the fire risks associated with the painting and cleaning services.

412.5.5 Storage. Storage of flammable or combustible liquids exceeding the maximum

===== Page 0343 =====
allowable quantities per control area in Table 307.1(1) shall be in a liquid storage room.

The storage of all flammable and combustible liquids must be limited to a liquid storage room. The applicable requirements of Section 415 and SBC 801 must be followed for liquid storage rooms to reduce the fire risks to the rest of the hangar operation.

412.5.6 Fire suppression. Aircraft paint hangars shall be provided with fire suppression as required by NFPA 409.

To minimize the fire hazards associated with aircraft paint hangars, all such buildings are required to be protected with a fire suppression system. This requirement is applicable regardless of the height or area of the hangar or the types and quantities of aircraft being cleaned or painted. The fire suppression system must be designed and installed in accordance with referenced standard NFPA 409. This standard contains specific requirements for the suppression systems needed to properly protect paint hangars.

412.5.7 Ventilation. Aircraft paint hangars shall be provided with ventilation as required in SBC 501.

Integral to the requirements for aircraft paint hangars are the ventilation provisions. Hazardous exhaust systems for controlling the overspray of painting and aircraft cleaning operations are required. These systems along with the necessary ventilation of the occupiable spaces must be in accordance with SBC 501.

412.5.8 Electrical. Electrical equipment and devices within the aircraft paint hangar shall comply with NFPA 70.

NFPA 70: National Electrical Code (NEC) is referenced as required for aircraft paint hangers. A key reason for this reference is to identify hazardous locations. "Hazardous location" is a term of the NEC with a specific meaning for application of NEC requirements. Class I, Division 1 and Class I, Division 2 locations are established in Sections 412.5.8.1 and 412.5.8.2. The NEC standards for these hazardous locations must be met.

412.5.8.1 Class I, Division I hazardous locations. The area within 3 m horizontally from aircraft surfaces and from the floor to 3 m above the aircraft surface shall be classified as a Class I, Division I location.

See the commentary to Section 412.5.8.

412.5.8.2 Class I, Division 2 hazardous locations. The area horizontally from aircraft surfaces between 3 m and 9 m and from the floor to 9 m above the aircraft surface shall be classified as a Class I, Division 2 location.

See the commentary to Section 412.5.8.
412.6 Aircraft manufacturing facilities. In buildings used for the manufacturing of aircraft, exit access travel distances indicated in Section 1017.1 shall be increased in accordance with the following:

1 The building shall be of Type I or II construction.

2 Exit access travel distance shall not exceed the distances given in Table 412.6.

Aircraft, both domestic and military, are assembled within huge facilities. What is being assembled is huge. For example, the tail height of a Boeing 747 is over 19 m tall. The assembly facilities for such aircraft frequently contain multiple planes at various stages of assembly. The traditional exit access travel distances are simply not reasonable for these facilities. The only way to comply with Chapter 10 travel distances would be to create exit passageways below the assembly floor. This would require occupants to behave in a counterintuitive fashion, moving into an underground enclosure where they would not be able to judge where the incident is occurring rather than away from the incident to an open area. Modeling of designs complying with this provision demonstrate the safety of these provisions for this specific use.

See the commentary to Section 412.6.

412.6.1 Ancillary areas. Rooms, areas and spaces ancillary to the primary manufacturing area shall be permitted to egress through such area having a minimum height as indicated in Table 412.6. Exit access travel distance within the ancillary room, area or space shall not exceed that indicated in Table 1017.2 based on the occupancy classification of that ancillary area. Total exit access travel distance shall not exceed that indicated in Table 412.6.

It is common to have various rooms surrounding the main assembly floor where support functions are provided, perhaps storage of some parts or assembly of smaller units that are then installed into the aircraft being assembled on the main floor. These spaces are part and parcel to the function of the aircraft manufacturing/assembly process. This section allows these spaces to essentially use the main assembly space as an intervening room in the exit access pathway. The travel distance within such rooms is going to comply with the distances in Table 1017.2. Total travel distance starting within the room until an exit is reached is limited to those found in Table 412.6.

412.7 Heliports and helistops. Heliports and helistops shall be permitted to be erected on buildings or other locations where they are

===== Page 0344 =====
constructed in accordance with Sections 412.7.1 through 412.7.5.

This section contains special use and occupancy requirements for a very unique and specialized aircraft occupancy those related to helicopters. Because of the limited space requirements necessary for the landing and taking off of helicopters, these areas are more likely to be incorporated into other buildings and structures, such as hospitals or large office buildings, than facilities for fixed-wing aircraft. Included in these requirements are provisions for minimum clearance sizes, structural use and design, means of egress and a referenced standard for roof-top locations. Heliports and helistops pose less fire hazard than the storage of these aircraft in hangars, but increased life safety risks.

Heliports and helistops are permitted to be located anywhere as long as they meet the requirements of Section 412.7. Government regulations may have restrictions on the locations of heliports and helistops for general aviation purposes. However, the code only addresses those fire and life safety hazards associated with heliport and helistop locations to other buildings and structures and the means of egress from the same.

412.7.1 Size. The landing area for helicopters less than 1600 kg shall be not less than 6 m in length and width. The landing area shall be surrounded on all sides by a clear area having a minimum average width at roof level of 4.5 m but with no width less than 1.5 m.

The landing pad for small helicopters [less than 1600 kg in weight] must be a minimum 6 m-diameter circle. In addition, a concentric circle must be provided around the landing pad, providing a clear area with an average width of 4.5 m but with the least dimension of not less than 1.5 m. This additional clear space provides an increased landing area during windy conditions when pinpoint landing is not possible. Further, this clear area maintains the necessary separation between the rotating blades and all adjacent construction.

412.7.2 Design. Helicopter landing areas and the supports thereof on the roof of a building shall be noncombustible construction. Landing areas shall be designed to confine any flammable liquid spillage to the landing area itself and provisions shall be made to drain such spillage away from any exit or stairway serving the helicopter landing area or from a structure housing such exit or stairway. For structural design requirements, see Section 1607.6.

Landing areas (helistops) located on the roofs of buildings must be of noncombustible materials, including the supporting construction. This requirement is necessary to provide a structurally sound support for the additional weight of the helicopter and its loads. This section refers to Section 1607.6 for further structural design requirements. Section 1607.6 requires that the building designer must account for the increased roof loads, including impact loads in the structural design.

Roof-top landing areas must be sloped or diked to prevent any spillage of flammable fuel from the helicopter from entering the building. This is most important since penthouse doors or exit stairways could allow spilled hazardous materials and vapors to enter the building, which would pose an unacceptable fire hazard.

412.7.3 Means of egress. The means of egress from heliports and helistops shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 10. Landing areas located on buildings or structures shall have two or more exits or access to exits. For landing areas less than 18 m in length or less than 185 m \( ^{2} \)  in area, the second means of egress is permitted to be a fire escape, alternating tread device or ladder leading to the floor below.

As with all means of egress, the required egress paths from heliports and helistops must be in accordance with Chapter 10. Rooftop landing areas must be provided with at least two remotely located exits or exit access so that the helicopter occupants have redundant means to leave the landing area and enter the building. For very small landing areas, the code would permit one exit into the building while the other could take the form of a fire escape, alternating tread device or ladder to the next lower floor level.

412.7.4 Roof-top heliports and helistops. Roof-top heliports and helistops shall comply with NFPA 418.

In addition to the specific requirements of Section 412.7, roof-top heliports and helistops must comply with referenced standard NFPA 418. That standard provides further life safety and fire safety requirements associated with roof-top landing areas.

412.7.5 Standpipe system. In buildings equipped with a standpipe system, the standpipe shall extend to the roof level in accordance with Section 905.3.6

In order to assist with fire suppression activities, a standpipe system is required in those buildings with a roof-top helistop or heliport. Section 905.3.6 requires that the standpipe system be extended to the roof level on which the helistop or heliport is located. Section 2007.5 of SBC 801 provides additional information with regard to the placement of standpipe connections.

===== Page 0345 =====
# CHAPTER 4—SPECIAL DETAILED REQUIREMENTS BASED ON OCCUPANCY AND USE

## SECTION 413 COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE

413.1 General. High-piled stock or rack storage in any occupancy group shall comply with SBC 801.

This section alerts the code user to the specific high-piled combustible storage requirements contained in Chapter 32 of SBC 801. High-piled storage presents a hazard above that of normal combustible storage. By increasing the height of the storage, the ability for a fire to grow and thrive is increased dramatically. Therefore, such storage requires special consideration with regard to arrangement and fire protection design features.

Chapter 32 of SBC 801 provides requirements for the high-piled storage of combustible materials regardless of the occupancy classification. High-piled storage can occur in many different occupancies, but is most typical in Group M, S and F occupancies. High-piled storage of combustible materials includes solid-piled, palletized, shelf or rack storage where the top of storage is in excess of 3.6 m in height or 1.8 m for high-hazard commodities. Commodity classifications for all types of products, as well as fire protection requirements, are provided in Chapter 32 of SBC 801 and the high-piled storage provisions of NFPA 13.

413.2 Attic, under-floor and concealed spaces. Attic, under-floor and concealed spaces used for storage of combustible materials shall be protected on the storage side as required for 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction. Openings shall be protected by assemblies that are self-closing and are of noncombustible construction or solid wood core not less than 45 mm in thickness.

Exception: Neither fire-resistance-rated construction nor opening protectives are required in any of the following locations:

1. Areas protected by approved automatic sprinkler systems.

2. Group R-3 and U occupancies.

The severity of a potential fire hazard increases where combustibles are located within concealed spaces and similar areas that provide limited access to manual firefighting. The areas typically have low supervision and, therefore, there is increased potential for a fire to develop and spread undetected through the building. This section regulates the minimum level of separation required between storage areas and the main occupiable area in nonsprinklered buildings. Since the intent is to protect against a fire in the storage area endangering the other occupied areas of the building, the required 1-hour fire-resistance rating need only be achieved from the storage side. While any access openings in the 1-hour fire-resistant construction need not be rated, they must be self-closing and of either noncombustible construction or a minimum 45 mm thickness of solid wood core.

Item 1 of the exception exempts the storage area from being separated by 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction, provided the area is protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system. This exception only requires the sprinkler system in the attic, underfloor or concealed space. Complete sprinkler protection throughout the building is not required in order to be in compliance with the exception.

Item 2 of the exception clarifies that storage in residential occupancies classified as Group R-3 and Group U utility structures are exempt from the separation requirement.

## SECTION 414 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS

414.1 General. The provisions of Sections 414.1 through 414.6 shall apply to buildings and structures occupied for the manufacturing, processing, dispensing, use or storage of hazardous materials.

This section, along with Sections 307 (High-hazard Group H) and 415 (Groups H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5) and SBC 801, are intended to be companion provisions for the treatment of occupancies that contain hazardous materials. Any building or structure utilizing hazardous materials, regardless of quantity, is to comply with all of the applicable provisions of both the code and SBC 801. This section also contains design alternatives for the use and storage of hazardous materials without classifying the building as a high-hazard Group H occupancy through the use of control areas (Section 414.2) or the mercantile display option (Section 414.2.5). While Section 414 contains general construction-related requirements for high-hazard occupancies, they are not indicative of a specific Group H occupancy classification but are dictated by hazardous material requirements in SBC 801. Construction-related provisions for specific Group H occupancies are contained in Section 415.

The provisions of Section 414 apply to the use and storage of hazardous materials whether or not the building is classified as Group H. Requirements for specific materials are contained in SBC 801.

414.1.1 Other provisions. Buildings and structures with an occupancy in Group H shall comply with this section and the applicable provisions of Section 415 and SBC 801.

===== Page 0346 =====
Section 415 is referenced for specific provisions applicable to occupancies classified as Groups H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5. Regardless of the actual quantity of hazardous materials present, the use and storage of all such materials are required to comply with the applicable provisions of SBC 801.

414.1.2 Materials. The safe design of hazardous material occupancies is material dependent. Individual material requirements are also found in Sections 307 and 415, and in SBC 501 and SBC 801.

This section emphasizes that high-hazard occupancies are different than other occupancies in that they are material dependent. This section alerts the code user to companion provisions in both SBC 501 and SBC 801. Section 307 contains specific parameters for where a high-hazard occupancy classification is warranted. Section 415 contains specific building requirements dependent on the actual Group H occupancy classification for the building or area.

414.1.2.1 Aerosol products, aerosol cooking spray products and plastic aerosol 3 products. Level 2 and 3 aerosol products, aerosol cooking spray products and plastic aerosol 3 products shall be stored and displayed in accordance with SBC 801. See Section 311.2 and SBC 801 for occupancy group requirements.

Where Level 2 and 3 aerosol products, aerosol cooking spray products or plastic aerosol 3 products are stored or displayed in accordance with Chapter 51 of SBC 801, they may be classified as a Group S-1 occupancy as stated in Section 311.2. Section 307.1.1, Item 12, specifically exempts aerosol product storage from being classified as a Group H occupancy where in compliance with SBC 801. The protection required by SBC 801 is important so that the hazards created by these aerosol products are addressed. The reference to SBC 801 will also address those locations where limited quantities of aerosol products are allowed in other occupancies.

414.1.3 Information required. A report shall be submitted to the building official identifying the maximum expected quantities of hazardous materials to be stored, used in a closed system and used in an open system, and subdivided to separately address hazardous material classification categories based on Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2). The methods of protection from such hazards, including but not limited to control areas, fire protection systems and Group H occupancies shall be indicated in the report and on the construction documents. The opinion and report shall be prepared by a qualified person, firm or corporation approved by the building official and provided without charge to the enforcing agency. For buildings and structures with an occupancy in Group H, separate floor plans shall be submitted identifying the locations of anticipated contents and processes so as to reflect the nature of each occupied portion of every building and structure.

A detailed plan addressing storage of hazardous materials, as well as their use in both closed and open systems, must be prepared and submitted to the building official. Such a plan is essential for assisting fire department and other emergency response personnel in hazardous materials situations. A report, such as a Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP), as indicated in SBC 801, or other approved plan, should be submitted to aid fire department personnel in the building design pre-planning phase.

414.2 Control areas. Control areas shall comply with Sections 414.2.1 through 414.2.5 and SBC 801.

Exception: Higher education laboratories in accordance with Section 428 and Chapter 38 of SBC 801.

As defined in Section 202, control areas are spaces within a building where quantities of hazardous materials not exceeding the maximum allowable quantities per control area are stored, dispensed, used or handled.

This section, in conjunction with the maximum allowable quantity tables in Section 307, utilizes a limited density concept for hazardous materials through the use of control areas. The intent of the control area concept is to provide an alternative method for the handling of hazardous materials without classifying the occupancy as Group H. In order to not be considered Group H, the amount of hazardous materials within any single control area bounded by fire barriers, horizontal assemblies, fire walls and exterior walls cannot exceed the maximum allowable quantity for a specific material listed in Table 307.1(1) or Table 307.1(2) (see Commentary Figure 414.2). A control area may be an entire building or a portion thereof. Note that when an entire building is the control area, the entire maximum allowable quantity of material from Table 307.1(1) or Table 307.1(2) located on any story is subject to the limitations of Table 414.2.2 (see SBC 801 Interpretation Numbers 51-07 and 52-07).

The exception applies to higher education laboratories. Section 428 has a different set of criteria applicable to higher education laboratories, which supersede the provisions of Section 414.

===== Page 0347 =====
414.2.1 Construction requirements. Control areas shall be separated from each other by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Control areas are compartments of a building surrounded by fire barrier walls and fire-resistance-rated horizontal assemblies. Where there are no fire barriers or fire-resistance-rated horizontal assemblies, the entire building is a single control area, for the purpose of applying these code provisions. Therefore, where more than the permitted maximum allowable quantities of Table 307.1(1) or 307.1(2) are anticipated in the building, additional control areas with minimum 1-hour fire barrier wall construction (2 hours where more than three stories) must be provided in order to not warrant a high-hazard occupancy classification. The provisions for required fire barriers also minimize the possibility of simultaneous involvement of multiple control areas due to a single fire condition. A fire in a single control area would involve only the amount of hazardous materials as limited by the maximum allowable quantities.

414.2.2 Percentage of maximum allowable quantities. The percentage of maximum allowable quantities of hazardous materials per control area permitted at each floor level within a building shall be in accordance with Table 414.2.2.

Table 414.2.2 specifies the percentage of maximum allowable quantities of hazardous materials per control area dependent on the location of a given floor level with respect to grade. The noted percentages are a percentage of the maximum allowable quantities of hazardous materials permitted per control area in accordance with Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2).

For example, Table 307.1(1) would allow 900 L of Class IB flammable liquid (in a storage condition) per control area in a fully sprinklered building [see Table 307.1(1), Note d]. Table 414.2.2, in turn, would allow 75 percent of the maximum allowable quantity per control area for control areas located on the second-floor level above grade. As such, 680 L of Class IB flammable liquids per control area could be stored on the second floor of a fully sprinklered building without classifying the building as a Group H-3 high-hazard occupancy.

See Table 414.2.2.

The purpose of Table 414.2.2 is to establish the maximum allowable quantity of hazardous materials permitted in a building without classifying the building as a high-hazard occupancy based on the use of control areas. The number of control areas and permitted quantities of hazardous materials per control area are reduced where stored or used above the first-floor level. This table also sets forth the minimum vertical fire barrier assemblies between adjacent control areas on the same floor. For floor levels above the third floor, a minimum 2-hour fire barrier is required from adjacent areas to aid fire department response due to the additional time necessary for them to access the hazardous material storage areas on upper floors. The required fire-resistance rating of the horizontal assembly above the control area is dictated by the required fire-resistance rating of the enclosure walls of the control area in order to maintain continuity and integrity. Special attention needs to be given to the rating of the floor of the control area, especially for levels below the fourth level. Section 414.2.4 requires that the floor of the control area and its supporting construction have a minimum 2-hour fire-resistance rating. In general, this will not affect floors above the third level since the continuity provisions of Section 707.5 where combined with the 2-hour separation requirement from Table 414.2.2 will ensure the floor that supports the fire barrier has an equivalent rating. However, in situations where Table 414.2.2 only requires the walls separating control areas to be of 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction, Section 414.2.4 still would require a 2-hour fire-resistance-rated floor. This could greatly affect the design of a two-story building that was originally intended to be of Type IIB construction (see commentary, Section 414.2.4).

The percentage of quantities of hazardous materials per control area per floor area is intended to be cumulative. A two-story building, therefore, could contain three control areas with each having 75 percent of the maximum allowable quantity on the second floor in addition to the four control areas containing 100 percent each of the maximum allowable quantity on the first floor. This condition would require that adequate fire-resistance-rated separation be provided.

Note a clarifies that the maximum allowable quantity of hazardous materials per control area is based on Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2). The maximum permitted amount includes the increases allowed by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13, approved hazardous material storage cabinets or both where applicable.

Note b clarifies the fire barrier separation needed to establish the boundaries of the control area that include not only the vertical wall assemblies but also the floor/ceiling

===== Page 0348 =====
assemblies in order to be adequately separated from all adjacent interior spaces. Example: Determine the maximum amount of Class IB flammable liquids that can be stored within a single-story, 900 m \( ^{2} \)  nonsprinklered Group F-1 occupancy (see Commentary Figure 414.2.2) of Type IIB construction without classifying the storage area as Group H-2.

- Based on a maximum allowable quantity of 455 L for Class IB flammable liquids from Table 307.1(1), a maximum of 455 L can be stored in each of the four control areas. Therefore, while the building may actually contain a total of 1820 L, a maximum of 455 L is permitted in each control area that is separated from all adjacent control areas by minimum 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707.

- The building, in this case, could still be classified as Group F-1.

- An automatic fire suppression system would not be required, since the 1100 m² threshold for suppression of Group F-1 fire areas is not exceeded (Section 903.2.4) and there are no control areas containing hazardous materials that exceed the maximum allowable quantities.

- Notes d and e of Table 307.1(1) would allow the base quantity of Class IB flammable liquids to be increased 100 percent in buildings protected with an automatic sprinkler system or where the material is stored in approved hazardous material storage cabinets. In this example, this would result in increasing the maximum allowable quantity of Class IB flammable liquids by a factor of two.

Therefore, the building could now contain a total of 3600 Liters with a maximum of 900 Liters in each of the four control areas, separated as required by the code, and still maintain a Group F-1 classification.

Where both an automatic sprinkler system and hazardous material storage cabinets are used to protect Class IB flammable liquids, then the base quantity of Table 307.1(1) could be increased by a factor of four.

The building in this example, therefore, with both sprinkler protection and approved cabinets, could contain a total of 7200 Liters with a maximum of 1800 Liters in each of the four control areas, separated as required by the code, and still maintain a Group F-1 classification. The allowable increase in the maximum allowable quantities is offset by the additional level or levels of protection.
The use of control areas provides a tradeoff based on building compartmentation. Fire protection (automatic sprinkler systems) and controlled storage through the use of approved hazardous material storage cabinets also adds a degree of protection, justifying the increased allowable quantities.

414.2.3 Number. The maximum number of control areas within a building shall be in accordance with Table 414.2.2. For the purposes of determining the number of control areas within a building, each portion of a building separated by one or more fire walls complying with Section 706 shall be considered a separate building.

The maximum quantity of hazardous materials permitted in a building without classifying the building as a Group H, high-hazard occupancy is regulated per control area and not per building area. The quantity limitation for the entire building would be established based on the number of permitted control areas on each floor of the building in accordance with Table 414.2.2. However, building areas separated by fire walls per Section 706 are independently applied to the table for number of control areas. Based on the table, the first floor could contain four control areas with up to 100 percent of the maximum allowable quantity of hazardous materials per control area. For example, a single control area in a nonsprinklered building could contain up to 110 Liters of Class IA flammable liquids, 55 kg of Class III organic peroxides, 110 kg of Class 2 oxidizers and 1850 Liters of corrosive liquids based on the maximum allowable quantities of Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2). Those quantities could be contained in each of four different control areas, provided that all control areas are separated from each other with minimum 1-hour fire barriers and horizontal assemblies. Please note that in order to have more control areas per floor than indicated in Table 414.2.2, a fire wall in accordance with Section 706 would be required in order to create separate buildings within the total structure.

414.2.4 Fire-resistance-rating requirements. The required fire-resistance rating for fire barriers shall be in accordance with Table 414.2.2. The floor assembly of the control area and the construction supporting the floor of the control area shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.

Exception: The floor assembly of the control area and the construction supporting the floor of the control area are allowed to be 1-hour fire-resistance-rated in buildings of Types IIA, IIIA, IV and VA construction, provided that both of the following conditions exist:

===== Page 0349 =====
1. The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2. The building is three or fewer stories above grade plane.

The fire separation requirements for control areas, both horizontal and vertical, are dependent on their location in a building in accordance with Table 414.2.2. The amount of hazardous materials per control area, as well as the number of control areas per floor, are reduced if stored or used above the first floor. Where the control area is located above the first floor, the floor assembly and all supporting construction for the control area would require a minimum 2-hour fire-resistance rating. The required 2-hour fire resistance rating of the floor construction only refers to the floor of the control area. The increased fire resistance rating and reduced quantities are intended to aid fire department personnel. The use of control areas on upper floors provides an alternative method for multistory research and laboratory-type facilities that may need to use a limited amount of hazardous materials throughout various portions of the building. Without control areas, the maximum allowable quantity for a hazardous material would be limited to a single building area regardless of the overall size or height of the building. For example, where control areas are not utilized, a 4650 m² single-story building would be limited to the same quantity of hazardous materials as a two-story building with 465 m² per floor.

Buildings of Types IIA, IIIA, IV and VA construction are required to have floor construction with a minimum fire-resistance rating of 1-hour as indicated in Table 601. The exception recognizes the combination of a 1-hour horizontal assembly in conjunction with sprinkler protection as a reasonable alternative for the noted construction types. The three-story limitation is consistent with the fire-resistant-rating requirements for fire barriers in Table 414.2.2.

414.2.5 Hazardous material in Group M display and storage areas and in Group S storage areas. Hazardous materials located in Group M and Group S occupancies shall be in accordance with Sections 414.2.5.1 through 414.2.5.3.

Sections 414.2.5.1 through 414.2.5.3 address options for control areas containing certain nonflammable or noncombustible hazardous materials that are stored in mercantile and storage occupancies, including outdoor control areas. These sections allow Group H-4 materials, which present a health hazard rather than a physical hazard, as well as limited Group H-2 and H-3 materials, such as oxidizers, to be stored in both retail display and stock areas of regulated mercantile occupancies and in storage-related occupancies in excess of the maximum allowable quantities of Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2) without classifying the building as Group H. Without these options, many mercantile and storage occupancies could be classified technically as Group H. The increased quantities of certain hazardous materials are based on the recognition that while there is limited risk in these occupancies, the packaging and storage arrangements can be controlled. For further information on the storage limitations required for these types of materials, see Section 5003.11.3 of SBC 801.

414.2.5.1 Nonflammable solids and noncombustible liquids. The aggregate quantity of nonflammable solid and nonflammable or noncombustible liquid hazardous materials permitted within a single control area of a Group M display and storage area, a Group S storage area or an outdoor control area is permitted to exceed the maximum allowable quantities per control area specified in Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2) without classifying the building or use as a Group H occupancy, provided that the materials are displayed and stored in accordance with SBC 801 and quantities do not exceed the maximum allowable specified in Table 414.2.5(1).

This section, in conjunction with Table 414.2.5(1), establishes the maximum quantity of the indicated hazardous materials permitted within a single control area of a mercantile occupancy. As indicated in Table 414.2.5(1), this section only applies to certain nonflammable solids and nonflammable or noncombustible liquids. Please note that this option is not applicable to mercantile and storage occupancies containing hazardous materials other than those indicated in Table 414.2.5(1).

414.2.5.2 Flammable and combustible liquids. In Group M In Group M occupancy wholesale and retail sales uses, indoor storage of flammable and combustible liquids shall not exceed the maximum allowable quantities per control area as indicated in Table 414.2.5(2), provided that the materials are displayed and stored in accordance with SBC 801.

This section addresses Group M occupancies utilized for the wholesale and retail sale of flammable and combustible liquids. Group M occupancies must be able to display flammable and combustible liquids for sale to the public. The maximum allowable quantities of flammable and combustible liquids per control

===== Page 0350 =====
area can exceed the limitations of Table 307.1(1), provided they are in compliance with the amounts in Table 414.2.5(2) and displayed and stored in accordance with Section 5704.3.6 of SBC 801. Section 307.1.1, Item 2 also addresses this design alternative to a Group H occupancy classification for flammable and combustible liquids in

mercantile occupancies.

Table 414.2.5(1) lists the hazardous materials eligible for the mercantile and storage occupancy option and the corresponding maximum permitted quantities per control area, depending on the extent of protection provided. The permitted quantities of each listed material are independent of each other, as well as the various classes or physical state of a specific material. For example, a given control area could contain up to the permitted maximum quantity of Class 2 solid oxidizers, Class 3 solid oxidizers and Class 2 liquid oxidizers, in addition to the permitted quantities of corrosive materials.

Notes b and c would allow the listed maximum quantity in Table 414.2.5(1) to be increased because of the use of sprinklers, approved hazardous materials storage cabinets, or both. The notes are intended to be cumulative in that up to four times the listed amount may be allowed per control area, where the building is fully sprinkler protected and approved cabinets are utilized, without classifying the building as Group H.

Note d simply refers to Table 414.2.2 for the design and permitted number of control areas. The 100-percent increase in maximum quantities for outdoor control areas permitted by Note f is based on the reduced exposure hazard to the building and its occupants. The increase encourages exterior storage applications without mandating sprinkler protection or approved hazardous material storage cabinets.

Notes g and h recognize that Class 2 and 3 solid oxidizers include several disinfectants that are commonly used in recreational, potable and wastewater treatment. Without these exceptions, the tabular maximum allowable quantities allowed in Group M and S occupancies would not be sufficient to sustain trade demand during times of peak usage. Because small containers of these materials have not been involved in losses, the exceptions permit additional containers of 4.5 kg or less. Note that Section 5003.11.3.6 of SBC 801 limits the tabular quantities to individual containers of 45 kg or less, whereas these exceptions give the retailer/wholesaler the option of increasing quantities on the shelves when the packaging sizes are reduced and limited to 4.5 kg or less.

Note i recognizes the inherently higher level of protection and safety afforded by a sprinkler system and that, by definition, the only hazard presented by Class 1 oxidizers is that they slightly increase the burning rate of combustible materials with which they may come into contact during a fire. Materials with such properties present nowhere near the level of hazard of many ordinary commodities that might be found in a Group M or S occupancy, such as foam plastics. To put this matter into perspective, Class 1 oxidizers are materials with a degree of hazard similar to that of toilet bowl cleaner crystals. Note i also correlates with Table 307.1(1), Note f.

Note j further recognizes the lesser hazard of Class 1 oxidizers and the inherent safety of storing hazardous materials outdoors by allowing quantities to be unlimited in outdoor control areas. Note j also correlates with Table 5003.1.1(3) of SBC 801.

Note k is focused on toxic materials in solid form, which pose very low risk to occupants in Group M and S occupancies for the materials typically being stored or made available for purchase. Chemicals in a solid form, including granules and pellets, are generally too large to become airborne. Some of the product may be broken down during packaging and handling, creating particles fine enough to produce airborne dust, but the consideration in storage situations is whether this potential airborne dust would contain respirable particles.

This allowance is partially based on the artificial nature of the LC threshold measurement that toxicity is based on. The process necessary to prepare the sample for testing does not simulate the expected normal conditions in a typical retail or wholesale building. These procedures create an artificial environment to meet the conditions of the LC testing protocol and it would be unlikely that these conditions would exist in a natural environment.

See Table 414.2.5(2).

Table 414.2.5(2) provides the maximum allowable quantity of flammable and combustible liquids per control area in mercantile occupancies. The limitations are based on the type of flammable and combustible liquid in the control area, the type of storage (such as racked or palletized) and the level of sprinkler protection.

The easier the flammable or combustible liquid is to ignite, the more restrictive is the quantity of liquid allowed. As such, the table severely limits the quantity of Class IA liquids. Class IIIB liquids, on the other hand, given their flash

===== Page 0351 =====
points above  \( 93^{\circ} \) C, are unlimited in a building with an automatic sprinkler system.

The automatic sprinkler system must be designed in accordance with NFPA 13. Flammable and combustible liquids displayed on shelves of 1800 mm or less are treated as an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 occupancy in accordance with NFPA 13, which would require a minimum sprinkler density of 0.76 Liters per minute per square meter over the most remote 140 m \( ^{2} \)  area.

Because the flammable and combustible liquids are more exposed in individual packaging, the sprinkler system can provide better fire control. Where the flammable and combustible liquids are displayed or stored in cartons, pallets or racks, the minimum sprinkler density is 0.795 Liters per minute per square meter over the most remote 140 m \( ^{2} \)  area. This type of display or storage is limited to a maximum height of 1.37 m. This type of packaging is more difficult for the fire sprinkler system to handle, so a greater density is required.

To allow a larger quantity and increased storage height of flammable and combustible liquids, the mercantile occupancy would require an enhanced sprinkler system in accordance with the applicable provisions of SBC 801 and NFPA 30. These provisions would require the sprinkler system to have a greater design density and operating area to adequately protect most storage conditions. For additional guidance, see Section 5704.3.6 of SBC 801.

414.2.5.3 Aerosol products, aerosol cooking spray products or plastic aerosol 3 products. The maximum quantity of aerosol products, aerosol cooking spray products or plastic aerosol 3 products in Group M occupancy retail display areas, storage areas adjacent to retail display areas and retail storage areas shall be in accordance with SBC 801.

The retail sale of aerosol products, aerosol cooking spray products and plastic aerosol 3 products requires compliance with Chapter 51 of SBC 801 and the applicable provisions of NFPA 30B.

414.3 Ventilation. Rooms, areas or spaces in which explosive, corrosive, combustible, flammable or highly toxic dusts, mists, fumes, vapors or gases are or may be emitted due to the processing, use, handling or storage of materials shall be mechanically ventilated where required by this code, SBC 801 or SBC 501.

Emissions generated at workstations shall be confined to the area in which they are generated as specified in SBC 801 and SBC 501.
This section requires mechanical ventilation for occupancies utilizing hazardous materials where required by SBC 801. The specific ventilation requirements are required to be in accordance with the applicable provisions in SBC 501.

With regard to ducts conveying hazardous exhaust, the intent of this section is to minimize the potential for spreading hazardous exhaust to other parts of the building as a result of duct leakage or failure. In the event of a duct fire or explosion, other areas of the building could be jeopardized. Section 414.3 requires the exhaust flow to be maintained at concentrations below the lower flammability limit (LFL) of the contaminant. In all cases, ducts conveying hazardous exhaust must not extend into or through other ducts or plenum spaces, unless the flammable vapor-air mixtures are less than 25 percent of the LFL of the vapor being generated. The reference to workstations addresses spaces within a Group H-5 occupancy that utilize hazardous production materials within a fabrication area. The required control of emissions at workstations is intended to prevent exposure of the workstation operator to hazardous fumes or vapors and to prevent hazardous concentrations of the materials used in the manufacturing process.

The exhaust system required by this section must be provided with an emergency manual shutoff control (kill switch) that will permit the exhaust system to be shut down without requiring personnel to enter the storage room. In the event of an emergency, it would be desirable to shut off an exhaust fan that is a source of ignition or is exhausting significant quantities of hazardous substances as a result of leaking storage containers. Under some circumstances, continued operation of an exhaust system could increase the level of hazard or cause the spread of fire. To prevent tampering and unauthorized use of the shutoff control, such controls must be of the type that requires a seal to be broken before they can be actuated. The control must be clearly identified as to its purpose.

414.4 Hazardous material systems. Systems involving hazardous materials shall be suitable for the intended application. Controls shall be designed to prevent materials from entering or leaving process or reaction systems at other than the intended time, rate or path. Automatic controls, where provided, shall be designed to be fail safe.

Process-type systems involving the use of hazardous materials generally involve many design variables. Many times, the building official may not be aware of the potentially

===== Page 0352 =====
dangerous chemical combination or use of incompatible materials that might be inherent in a given system. This section simply requires that all systems involving the use of hazardous materials should be designed to prevent an unwanted mixture of hazardous materials from occurring.

414.5 Inside storage, dispensing and use. The inside storage, dispensing and use of hazardous materials shall be in accordance with Sections 414.5.1 through 414.5.3 of this code and SBC 801.

Sections 414.5.1 through 414.5.3 contain construction-related items for the inside storage and use of hazardous materials. The applicability of the provisions of Section 414.5 is dependent on the specific hazardous material requirements in SBC 801. It is important to note that these provisions are not solely applicable to Group H occupancies.

414.5.1 Explosion control. Explosion control shall be provided in accordance with SBC 801 as required by Table 414.5.1 where quantities of hazardous materials specified in that table exceed the maximum allowable quantities in Table 307.1(1) or where a structure, room or space is occupied for purposes involving explosion hazards as required by Section 415 or SBC 801.

It is usually impractical to design a building to withstand the pressure created by an explosion; therefore, this Section mandates an explosion relief system for all structures, rooms or spaces with uses involving explosion hazards. Explosions may result from the over-pressurization of a containing structure, by physical/chemical means or by a chemical reaction. During an explosion, a sudden release of a high-pressure gas occurs and the energy is dissipated in the form of a shock wave.

All structures, rooms or spaces with those special uses listed in Table 414.5.1 involving explosion hazards must be equipped with some method of explosion control as required by Section 415 or the material-specific requirements in SBC 801. Table 414.5.1 also specifies where explosion control is required based on certain materials where the quantities of hazardous materials involved exceed the maximum allowable quantities in Table 307.1(1). Similarly, Section 911 of SBC 801 recognizes explosion (deflagration) venting and explosion (deflagration) prevention systems as acceptable methods of explosion control, where appropriate. The use of barricades or other explosion protective devices, such as magazines, may be permitted as the means of explosion control where indicated in SBC 801 as an acceptable alternative and approved by the building official.

See Table 414.5.1.

This table designates where explosion control is required for specific materials or special use conditions. The applicability of this table assumes either the quantities of hazardous materials involved exceed the maximum allowable quantities in Table 307.1(1), listed in this table under "Hazard Category," or special explosion hazards exist as listed under "Special Uses" in this table. Section 911 of SBC 801 provides design criteria for explosion (deflagration) venting. Explosion (deflagration) prevention systems, where utilized, must comply with NFPA 69. Barricade construction must be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 495. As indicated in Table 414.5.1, Note b, SBC 801 provides additional guidance as to the applicability and design criteria for explosion control methods.

414.5.2 Emergency or standby power. Where required by SBC 801 or this code, mechanical ventilation, treatment systems, temperature control, alarm, detection or other electrically operated systems shall be provided with emergency or standby power in accordance with Section 2702. For storage and use areas for highly toxic or toxic materials, see Sections 6004.2.2.8 and 6004.3.4.2 of SBC 801.

A backup emergency power source is considered essential for required systems monitoring hazardous materials. Therefore, where limit controls, detection systems or mechanical ventilation is required for a specific hazardous material, an emergency electrical system or standby power system is required.

414.5.2.1 Exempt applications. Emergency or standby power is not required for the mechanical ventilation systems provided for any of the following:

1 Storage of Class IB and IC flammable and combustible liquids in closed containers not exceeding 25 L capacity.

2 Storage of Class 1 and 2 oxidizers.

3 Storage of Class II, III, IV and V organic peroxides.

4 Storage of asphyxiant, irritant and radioactive gases.

Exemption 1 correlates with industry treatment of portable container storage. Notably, storage of small, closed containers does not pose a risk that warrants ventilation for these materials. FM Data Sheet 7-29, “Ignitable Liquid Storage in Portable Containers,” does not require mechanical ventilation for flammable liquids in closed containers of not greater than 25 L individual capacity, with a flash point of not

===== Page 0353 =====
greater than  \( 38^{\circ} \) C and a boiling point equal to or greater than  \( 38^{\circ} \) C. NFPA 30, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, also recognizes that closed container storage does not pose a risk that warrants ventilation (ventilation is required where there is open dispensing). These materials are in sealed containers in storage. Any loss of power would require an immediate cessation of operations, which would eliminate spill risk. By limiting the container size, the potential for accidental spills is significantly reduced.

Exemptions 2 and 3 address low-hazard oxidizers and organic peroxides that do not present a severe fire or reactivity hazard. Highly toxic and toxic materials (see Section 414.5.2) must conform to applicable requirements of Chapter 60 of SBC 801. For example, emergency power may be required for treatment systems utilized to process the accidental release of highly toxic or toxic compressed gases caused by a leak or rupture in storage cylinders or tanks. Without emergency power, all required monitoring systems, including the treatment system for neutralizing potential leaking gas, would be rendered inoperative if a power failure or other electrical system failure occurred.

Exemption 4 exempts storage areas for asphyxiant, irritant or radioactive gases because, unlike the requirements for hazard categories that use the Maximum Allowable Quantity (MAQ) per control area as a trigger threshold, the requirement for ventilation in storage areas containing asphyxiant, irritant and radioactive gases is not quantity based. The construction of compressed gas containers is robust compared to the containers used for other materials that may be of glass, plastic or paper. The integrity of the containers alone represents a major safeguard against likely failure. While leakage from containers is a consideration, the need for the reestablishment of power to the ventilation system within a 60-second period is not warranted given the fact that the requirement could be imposed for insignificant quantities of the gas, and given the fact that occupancy of a storage area during power outage is not the norm.

414.5.2.2 Fail-safe engineered systems. Standby power for mechanical ventilation, treatment systems and temperature control systems shall not be required where an approved failsafe engineered system is installed.

This Section recognizes the use of an engineered system that is designed to always fail in the appropriate design mode without human intervention in lieu of the emergency power system. The intent of this Section is to permit alternative systems that are not subject to power interruptions. This Section does not apply to detection and alarm systems but addresses those systems essential to the removal of hazardous fumes and vapors from potentially occupied areas.

414.5.3 Spill control, drainage and containment. Rooms, buildings or areas occupied for the storage of solid and liquid hazardous materials shall be provided with a means to control spillage and to contain or drain off spillage and fire protection water discharged in the storage area where required in SBC 801. The methods of spill control shall be in accordance with SBC 801.

This section references SBC 801 for material-specific occupancies containing materials in excess of the maximum allowable quantities, which would require some method of spill control, drainage and containment. The specific provisions for providing adequate spill control, drainage and containment, where required, are located in Section 5004.2 of SBC 801.

414.6 Outdoor storage, dispensing and use. The outdoor storage, dispensing and use of hazardous materials shall be in accordance with SBC 801.

This section requires the outdoor storage, dispensing and use of hazardous materials to be in accordance with the provisions of SBC 801, regardless of the quantity. Certain provisions in SBC 801, however, are only applicable where the maximum allowable quantities are exceeded. In general, the permitted quantity per outdoor control area exceeds that permitted for the inside storage or use of the same material. The outdoor storage or use of hazardous materials in excess of the maximum allowable quantities does not result in a high-hazard occupancy classification but simply dictates the need for additional requirements.

414.6.1 Weather protection. Where weather protection is provided for sheltering outdoor hazardous material storage or use areas, such areas shall be considered outdoor storage or use when the weather protection structure complies with Sections 414.6.1.1 through 414.6.1.3.

This section provides the minimum construction requirements for outdoor storage areas of hazardous materials that require protection from the elements. The need for weather protection is dependent on the specific material requirements in SBC 801. For ready access to materials, many such structures are commonly constructed as an attached canopy. Depending on the hazardous material involved, additional protection, such as fire suppression

===== Page 0354 =====
of the outside storage area, fire-resistance-rated exterior wall construction or a limitation on exterior wall openings, may be necessary. Structures not in compliance with the provisions of this section would be regulated as inside storage, and as such, would be considered a Group H, high-hazard occupancy where the maximum allowable quantities of a specific hazardous material were exceeded.

414.6.1.1 Walls. Walls shall not obstruct more than one side of the structure.

Exception: Walls shall be permitted to obstruct portions of multiple sides of the structure, provided that the obstructed area is not greater than 25 percent of the structure’s perimeter.

The structure should be sufficiently open to allow for adequate cross ventilation. The intent of this section is to allow either one full side of a weather protection structure to be obstructed or, through the exception, to permit portions of multiple sides to be obstructed, provided the obstructed perimeter does not exceed 25 percent of the total perimeter.

414.6.1.2 Separation distance. The distance from the structure to buildings, lot lines, public ways or means of egress to a public way shall be not less than the distance required for an outside hazardous material storage or use area without weather protection.

The structure is required to be located with respect to lot lines, public ways or the means of egress to the public way as required for the specific hazardous material provisions in SBC 801.

414.6.1.3 Noncombustible construction. The overhead structure shall be of approved noncombustible construction with a maximum area of 140 m².

Exception: The maximum area is permitted to be increased as provided by Section 506.

The overhead structure is required to be of noncombustible construction to eliminate the possibility of adding to the fuel load in a fire condition. The exception permits the area of the overhead structure to exceed the  \( 140 \, m^{2} \)  area limitation where open building frontage is provided. Though Section 506 does not directly address what increase would apply for automatic sprinklers, an increase for automatic sprinklers would be appropriate.

## SECTION 415 GROUPS H-1, H-2, H-3, H-4 AND H-5

415.1 General. The provisions of Sections 415.1 through 415.11 shall apply to the storage and use of hazardous materials in excess of the maximum allowable quantities per control area listed in Section 307.1.

This Section establishes the application of Section 415. The Section is only applicable in facilities where the maximum allowable quantity of a hazardous material listed in either Table 307.1(1) or 307.1(2) is exceeded.

415.2 Compliance. Buildings and structures with an occupancy in Group H shall also comply with the applicable provisions of Section 414 and SBC 801.

In addition to compliance with this section, Group H occupancies also must comply with provisions of Section 414, and various provisions of SBC 801 applicable to specific hazardous materials.

415.3 Automatic fire detection systems. Group H occupancies shall be provided with an automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2.

This section references Section 907.2.5 regarding the installation of automatic fire detection systems in Group H occupancies. Section 907.2.5 requires a manual fire alarm system in Group H-5 occupancies and occupancies classified as Group H used for the manufacture of organic coatings. This system shall activate the occupant notification system as specified in Section 907.5. Additionally, an automatic smoke detection system is required where highly toxic gases, organic peroxides and oxidizers are present. These systems, when activated, are required to sound a local alarm. See also Chapters 60, 62 and 63 of SBC 801 commentary.

415.4 Automatic sprinkler system. Group H occupancies shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.5.

An automatic sprinkler system is required throughout buildings or portions of buildings classified as Group H occupancies as established in Section 903.2.5. In other than Group H-5 occupancies, the sprinkler system required by this section is only required in those areas that have the Group H classification. For example, in a 740 m² Group F-1 factory with a 55 m²) Group H-3 storage room, only the storage room would require an automatic sprinkler system.

415.5 Emergency alarms. Emergency alarms for the detection and notification of an emergency condition in Group H occupancies shall be provided as set forth herein.

An emergency alarm is required in all areas utilized for the storage, dispensing, use and handling of hazardous materials in accordance with Sections 415.5.1 through 415.5.4. This Section assumes the area in question is where

===== Page 0355 =====
hazardous materials are used in excess of the maximum allowable quantities indicated in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2) and, therefore, the building is classified as a Group H occupancy.

415.5.1 Storage. An approved manual emergency alarm system shall be provided in buildings, rooms or areas used for storage of hazardous materials. Emergency alarm-initiating devices shall be installed outside of each interior exit or exit access door of storage buildings, rooms or areas. Activation of an emergency alarm-initiating device shall sound a local alarm to alert occupants of an emergency situation involving hazardous materials.

A manual pull station or other emergency signal device approved by the building official must be provided outside of each egress door to hazardous material storage areas. Activation of the device is intended to warn the building occupants of a potential dangerous condition within the hazardous material storage area. The alarm signal required by this section is intended only to be a local alarm. A complete evacuation alarm system, excluding a local trouble alarm located within the immediate high-hazard area, is not required.

415.5.2 Dispensing, use and handling. Where hazardous materials having a hazard ranking of 3 or 4 in accordance with NFPA 704 are transported through corridors, interior exit stairways or ramps, or exit passageways, there shall be an emergency telephone system, a local manual alarm station or an approved alarm-initiating device at not more than 45 m intervals and at each exit and exit access doorway throughout the transport route. The signal shall be relayed to an approved central, proprietary or remote station service or constantly attended on-site location and shall initiate a local audible alarm.

This section requires access to an approved supervised signaling device along the transport route where hazardous materials must be transported through corridors, interior exit stairways or exit passageways. A spill or other incident involving hazardous materials within a corridor or exit may render it unusable for egress. A loud audible alarm, which relays a signal to a remote station, allows a quick response by emergency responders.

415.5.3 Supervision. Emergency alarm systems required by Section 415.5.1 or 415.5.2 shall be electrically supervised and monitored by an approved central, proprietary or remote station service or shall initiate an audible and visual signal at a constantly attended on-site location.

This Section requires an approved method of electrical supervision for the emergency alarm systems for the hazardous material storage and use areas required by Sections 415.5.1 and 415.5.2. The method of supervision should also be in compliance with the applicable provisions of NFPA 72.

415.5.4 Emergency alarm systems. Emergency alarm systems required by Section 415.5.1 or 415.5.2 shall be provided with emergency or standby power in accordance with Section 2702.2.

This Section requires an approved emergency power system or standby power system for emergency alarm systems for the hazardous material storage and use areas required by Sections 415.5.1 and 415.5.2. The system is required to be in accordance with Section 2702. Technical requirements are found in SBC 801, NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401), NFPA 110 and NFPA 111 as stated in Section 2702.1.3. The requirement of emergency versus standby power may be found in SBC 801.

415.6 Fire separation distance. Group H occupancies shall be located on property in accordance with the other provisions of this chapter. In Groups H-2 and H-3, not less than 25 percent of the perimeter wall of the occupancy shall be an exterior wall.

This Section specifies the location of Group H storage areas within a building. In order to provide adequate access for fire-fighting operations and venting of the products of combustion, Group H-2 and H-3 storage areas within a building must be located along an exterior wall. Due to the limited hazard the next few Sections address some allowances for smaller limited operations.

415.6.1 Rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use, dispensing or mixing in open systems. Rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use, dispensing or mixing in open systems having a floor area of not more than  \( 46 \, m^{2} \)  need not be located on the outer perimeter of the building where they are in accordance with SBC 801 and NFPA 30.

This Section recognizes the use of inside storage rooms that are utilized for operations involving flammable and combustible liquids. These types of rooms, which have no perimeter access, are permitted by SBC 801 and NFPA 30. The size of the room as well as the quantity of liquids, however, are restricted due to the lack of perimeter access and ventilation options.

415.6.2 Liquid storage rooms and rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use in closed systems. Liquid storage rooms and rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use in closed systems, having a floor area of not more than  \( 100 \, m^{2} \)  need not be located on the outer perimeter where they are in accordance with SBC 801 and NFPA 30.

===== Page 0356 =====
This Section is similar to Section 415.6.1 except that a larger room area is permitted since the flammable and combustible liquids are in either storage or closed use. Storage and closed use represent a much lower hazard than the open-use condition, as vapors cannot readily be released to the atmosphere.

415.6.3 Spray paint booths. Spray paint booths that comply with SBC 801 need not be located on the outer perimeter.

Spray paint booths are typically power-ventilated structures within a building that have their own enclosure separate from the exterior wall construction. Chapter 24 of SBC 801 has extensive requirements for spray booths, including limits on where they can be located and specific requirements for safety systems. Spray booths are not restricted to Group H occupancies and can be used in many types of occupancies with specific limitations based on the occupancy. Section 416 addresses the construction of spray rooms; spray booths and spray spaces and generally refers to the requirement of SBC 801.

415.6.4 Group H occupancy minimum fire separation distance. Regardless of any other provisions, buildings containing Group H occupancies shall be set back to the minimum fire separation distance as set forth in Sections 415.6.4.1 through 415.6.4.4. Distances shall be measured from the walls enclosing the occupancy to lot lines, including those on a public way. Distances to assumed lot lines established for the purpose of determining exterior wall and opening protection are not to be used to establish the minimum fire separation distance for buildings on sites where explosives are manufactured or used when separation is provided in accordance with the quantity distance tables specified for explosive materials in SBC 801.

Due to the potentially volatile nature of hazardous materials, specific setback requirements are necessary for Group H occupancies. These provisions take precedence over provisions in the code that may specify a minimum fire separation distance based on building construction type and exposure (see Table 705.5). The listed conditions are dependent on the type of materials that are indicative of the specified Group H occupancies, the size of the hazardous material storage area and whether a detached building is required by Table 415.6.5.

When dealing with explosives, it is important to note that this Section makes a distinction between the assumed lot lines (see Section 705.3) that are used for determining exterior wall and opening protection and those that are used for the separation of buildings, based on fire separation distance, where explosives are involved. Where explosives are involved, the separation distances are measured between structures and not to some imaginary lot line that is assumed to be between them. It is reasonable to make this distinction since the separation distances for explosives far exceed the normal exterior wall and opening separation requirements.

415.6.4.1 Group H-1. Group H-1 occupancies shall be set back not less than 23 m and not less than required by SBC 801.

Exception: Fireworks manufacturing buildings separated in accordance with NFPA 1124.

Unless a greater distance is required by SBC 801, a minimum setback of 23 m is required between the walls enclosing a Group H-1 occupancy and all lot lines. The exception recognizes that fireworks manufacturing buildings pose unique hazards due to the potential volume (net weight) of fireworks in any single building. NFPA 1124 specifies the minimum separation distances between all process buildings, public highways and other inhabited buildings.

415.6.4.2 Group H-2. Group H-2 occupancies shall be set back not less than 9 m where the area of the occupancy is greater than 100 m \( ^{2} \)  and it is not required to be located in a detached building.

Unless required to be in a detached building as regulated by Section 415.6.5, all Group H-2 occupancies that exceed 100 m \( ^{2} \)  in floor area are to have at least 9 m between the walls enclosing the Group H-2 occupancy and the lot lines surrounding the site.

415.6.4.3 Groups H-2 and H-3. Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies shall be set back not less than 15 m where a detached building is required (see Table 415.6.5).

Where Table 415.6.5 requires a detached building due to the quantity of hazardous materials involved, the Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies must be set back at least 15 m from surrounding lot lines.

415.6.4.4 Explosive materials. Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies containing materials with explosive characteristics shall be separated as required by SBC 801. Where separations are not specified, the distances required shall be determined by a technical report issued in accordance with Section 414.1.3.

The physical separation requirements for Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies that contain explosive materials are not regulated by SBC

===== Page 0357 =====
201, but rather by Chapter 56 in SBC 801. In those situations where SBC 801 does not provide minimum separation requirements, it is necessary to do a specific analysis of the conditions and develop a technical report as described in Section 414.1.3.

415.6.5 Detached buildings for Group H-1, H-2 or H-3 occupancy. The storage or use of hazardous materials in excess of those amounts specified in Table 415.6.5 shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of Sections 415.7 and 415.8.

Due to the large quantity of hazardous materials found in some buildings, Table 415.6.5 requires detached buildings. This may include Groups H-1, H-2 and H-3 occupancies. Group H-1 occupancies by default are essentially required to be detached as noted by the amounts in Table 415.6.5 and Section 415.7. For Groups H-2 and H-3, even though some of these materials are less hazardous than those found in Group H-1, they do create a significant hazard in sufficiently large quantities.

See Table 415.6.5.

Table 415.6.5 establishes the threshold quantities of hazardous materials above which storage must occur in detached structures. The need for detached storage is a function of the type, physical state and quantity of material.

415.6.5.1 Wall and opening protection. Where a detached building is required by Table 415.6.5, wall and opening protection based on fire separation distance is not required.

Detached buildings are required to be adequately separated from lot lines and other important buildings. As such, additional exposure protection for exterior walls is not needed.

415.7 Special provisions for Group H-1 occupancies. Group H-1 occupancies shall be in detached buildings not used for other purposes. Roofs shall be of lightweight construction with suitable thermal insulation to prevent sensitive material from reaching its decomposition temperature. Group H-1 occupancies containing materials that are in themselves both physical and health hazards in quantities exceeding the maximum allowable quantities per control area in Table 307.1(2) shall comply with requirements for both Group H-1 and H-4 occupancies.

Due to the explosion hazard potential associated with Group H-1 materials, Group H-1 occupancies are required to be in separate detached structures. The limitation of one story is based on the need to exit a building with a detonation hazard as soon as possible. Exiting from a second story or basement, even within an interior exit stairway, may not offer sufficient protection where an explosion hazard exists. The one-story limitation is also intended to limit the volume of detonable materials that could be stored in any one structure.

Group H-1 occupancies that contain materials that present a health as well as a detonation hazard must also comply with the applicable requirements for a Group H-4 occupancy (see commentary, Section 307.8).

415.7.1 Floors in storage rooms. Floors in storage areas for organic peroxides, pyrophoric materials and unstable (reactive) materials shall be of liquid-tight, noncombustible construction.

Noncombustible floors are required to prevent the structure from contributing to a fire scenario. The floors are also required to be liquid tight to prevent the materials from being absorbed into the flooring. Concrete is a fairly porous material.

415.8 Special provisions for Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies. Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies containing quantities of hazardous materials in excess of those set forth in Table 415.6.5 shall be in detached buildings used for manufacturing, processing, dispensing, use or storage of hazardous materials. Materials specified for Group H-1 occupancies in Section 307.3 are permitted to be located within Group H-2 or H-3 detached buildings provided that the amount of materials per control area do not exceed the maximum allowed quantity specified in Table 307.1(1).

This Section, in conjunction with Table 415.6.5, specifies the criteria under which a Group H-2 or H-3 occupancy must be in a detached structure. Detached structures used for the storage of hazardous materials are not intended to be mixed-use occupancies. In addition to the materials listed in Table 415.6.5, along with those addressed in Section 415.8.2, it is acceptable to locate materials listed in Section 307.3 in such detached structures provided they do not exceed the maximum allowable quantities per control area based on Table 307.1(1).

415.8.1 Multiple hazards. Group H-2 or H-3 occupancies containing materials that are in themselves both physical and health hazards in quantities exceeding the maximum allowable quantities per control area in Table 307.1(2) shall comply with requirements for Group H-2, H-3 or H-4 occupancies as applicable.

Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies that contain materials that pose a health as well as a physical hazard must also comply with the applicable requirements for a Group H-4 occupancy (see commentary, Section 307.8).

415.8.2 Separation of incompatible materials. Hazardous materials other than those listed in Table

===== Page 0358 =====
415.6.5 shall be allowed in manufacturing, processing, dispensing, use or storage areas when separated from incompatible materials in accordance with the provisions of SBC 801.

In addition to those hazardous materials specifically listed in Table 415.6.5, it is acceptable to use or store other types of hazardous materials in a detached building, provided that incompatible materials are isolated from each other in accordance with SBC 801.

415.8.3 Water reactives. Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies containing water-reactive materials shall be resistant to water penetration. Piping for conveying liquids shall not be over or through areas containing water reactives, unless isolated by approved liquid-tight construction.

Exception: Fire protection piping shall be permitted over or through areas containing water reactives without isolating it with liquid-tight construction.

The design and construction of buildings used for storing water-reactive materials must be such that water will not be permitted to come in contact with the stored materials. The building materials should be designed to resist the passage of flowing water. Piping conveying liquids in any area containing water-reactive materials must be isolated within liquid-tight construction. The exception allows fire protection piping to pass through without such protection.

415.8.4 Floors in storage rooms. Floors in storage areas for organic peroxides, oxidizers, pyrophoric materials, unstable (reactive) materials and water-reactive solids and liquids shall be of liquid-tight, noncombustible construction.

Noncombustible floors are required to prevent the structure from contributing to a fire scenario. The floors are also required to be liquid tight to prevent the materials from being absorbed into the flooring. Concrete is a fairly porous material.

415.8.5 Waterproof room. Rooms or areas used for the storage of water-reactive solids and liquids shall be constructed in a manner that resists the penetration of water through the use of waterproof materials. Piping carrying water for other than approved automatic sprinkler systems shall not be within such rooms or areas.

Similar to Section 415.8.5, storage rooms containing water-reactive materials must be waterproofed. Though water piping may not be run into or through such rooms, the code recognizes that automatic sprinkler systems are a more regulated type of water piping system and have a low leakage and failure rate where properly installed and maintained.
415.9 Group H-2. Occupancies in Group H-2 shall be constructed in accordance with Sections 415.9.1 through 415.9.3 and SBC 801.

Sections 415.9.1 through 415.9.3 contain specific construction requirements for occupancies that contain Group H-2 materials in excess of the maximum allowable quantities. Such occupancies are also required to comply with all material-specific related provisions in SBC 801. In addition, see the commentary to Section 426.

415.9.1 Flammable and combustible liquids. The storage, handling, processing and transporting of flammable and combustible liquids in Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies shall be in accordance with Sections 415.9.1.1 through 415.9.1.9, SBC 501 and SBC 801.

Although Section 415.9.1 and its subsections are part of Section 415.9, these sections apply to both Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies. The storage of flammable and combustible liquids constitutes a special hazard because of the potential fire severity and ease of ignition related to such liquids. The flash point is the most important criterion of the hazards associated with flammable and combustible liquids because it represents the lowest temperature at which sufficient vapor will be given off to form an ignitable or flammable mixture with air. Although it is the flammable vapors that burn or explode, flammable liquids (by definition) are normally stored above their flash point. Since flammable and combustible liquids are found in virtually every industrial plant and many other occupancies, minimum requirements for the storage of such liquids are set forth in the provisions of Chapter 57 of SBC 801 and NFPA 30.

Additionally, the provisions of Sections 415.9.1.1 through 415.9.1.9 permit the inside tank storage of flammable and combustible liquids. It is intended that all of these provisions, where applicable, be complied with in order to allow the installation of large tanks of flammable and combustible liquids within a building. These provisions were developed in part due to the cost of complying with environmental considerations regarding the installation of underground storage tanks. In downtown areas, above-ground inside storage tanks are commonly used in conjunction with emergency power generators. While not specifically defined, these provisions are intended for tanks proposed for fixed installation as opposed to containers and portable tanks, such as 200 L drums.

415.9.1.1 Mixed occupancies. Where the storage tank area is located in a building of two or more occupancies and the quantity of liquid

===== Page 0359 =====
exceeds the maximum allowable quantity for one control area, the use shall be completely separated from adjacent occupancies in accordance with the requirements of Section 508.4.

This Section requires mandatory fire-resistance-rated separation of the Group H storage tank area from adjacent areas containing other groups. By referencing Section 508.4 for separated mixed occupancies, the storage tank area would require a minimum fire barrier construction, both horizontally and vertically, whenever a mixed-occupancy condition occurs.

415.9.1.1.1 Height exception. Where storage tanks are located within a building not more than one story above grade plane, the height limitation of Section 504 shall not apply for Group H.

Group H storage tank areas may be located on an upper floor in a multiple story building subject to the limitations of Section 504. This Section specifically allows an exception to the building height in meter and stories in Group H occupancies, as long as the storage tank area is located within a building not more than one story. The height limitation for the building would be dictated by the other occupancy groups in the building and the actual construction type. The height exception assumes the storage tank area complies with all of the applicable provisions of Section 415.9.1 and Chapter 57 of SBC 801.

415.9.1.2 Tank protection. Storage tanks shall be noncombustible and protected from physical damage. Fire barriers or horizontal assemblies or both around the storage tanks shall be permitted as the method of protection from physical damage.

Storage tanks shall be noncombustible and protected from physical damage. Fire barriers, horizontal assemblies or both around the storage tanks shall be permitted as the method of protection from physical damage.

The intent of this section is to reduce the potential for industrial accidents involving storage tanks by providing a physical barrier, such as a pipe bollard or barricade. This section would also allow the fire barrier or horizontal assembly that is enclosing the storage tank area to qualify as the means of protection from physical damage. Any method of physical protection, other than a fire barrier wall assembly, must be approved by the building official.

415.9.1.3 Tanks. Storage tanks shall be approved tanks conforming to the requirements of SBC 801.

The design, construction and installation of all storage tanks for flammable and combustible liquids must comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 57 of SBC 801.
415.9.1.4 Leakage containment. A liquid-tight containment area compatible with the stored liquid shall be provided. The method of spill control, drainage control and secondary containment shall be in accordance with SBC 801.

Exception: Rooms where only double-wall storage tanks conforming to Section 415.9.1.3 are used to store Class I, II and IIIA flammable and combustible liquids shall not be required to have a leakage containment area.

In order to prevent the spread of flammable and combustible liquids to adjacent non-storage areas in the event of a leak in a storage tank, an adequately sized containment area is required. The sizing of the containment area should be designed to contain a spill from the largest vessel plus the fire protection water for the required duration. It is also important that the drainage system be sufficient to drain not only the flammable or combustible liquid but also the drainage water from the sprinkler system as well as hose streams. Since the outer wall of a double-walled storage tank acts as the secondary means of containment, the exception would allow the omission of the leakage containment area for all flammable and combustible liquids.

415.9.1.5 Leakage alarm. An approved automatic alarm shall be provided to indicate a leak in a storage tank and room. The alarm shall sound an audible signal, 15 dBa above the ambient sound level, at every point of entry into the room in which the leaking storage tank is located. An approved sign shall be posted on every entry door to the tank storage room indicating the potential hazard of the interior room environment, or the sign shall state: WARNING, WHEN ALARM SOUNDS, THE ENVIRONMENT WITHIN THE ROOM MAY BE HAZARDOUS. The leakage alarm shall also be supervised in accordance with Chapter 9 to transmit a trouble signal.

This section requires an alarm system to indicate a leak in the storage tank. The alarm must be supervised, as well as sound a local signal. Automatic electrical supervision of the leakage alarm is required in accordance with Section 901.6.4.

415.9.1.6 Tank vent. Storage tank vents for Class I, II or IIIA liquids shall terminate to the outdoor air in accordance with SBC 801.

Section 5704.2.7.3.3 of SBC 801 specifies the proper location of the tank vent to enable flammable vapors to be released to the outside air and dissipate without creating a hazard. It

===== Page 0360 =====
also requires the tank vent to terminate a minimum of 3.6 m above grade and 1.5 m from building openings and lot lines to reduce the possibility of ignitable concentrations of the vapors collecting near the discharge end of the vent pipe, entering building openings or exposing adjoining property.

415.9.1.7 Room ventilation. Storage tank areas storing Class I, II or IIIA liquids shall be provided with mechanical ventilation. The mechanical ventilation system shall be in accordance with SBC 501 and SBC 801.

This Section requires mechanical ventilation for storage tank areas in order to maintain any vapor accumulation at safe levels until the hazard of a spill or leak can be abated. The ventilation requirements for flammable or combustible liquid storage tanks must be in accordance with the applicable provisions of SBC 501 and SBC 801.

415.9.1.8 Explosion venting. Where Class I liquids are being stored, explosion venting shall be provided in accordance with SBC 801.

Class I flammable liquids, where stored in sufficient quantities, can readily produce vapors within the explosive limitations. Explosion venting must be in accordance with the provisions of Sections 414.5.1 and Chapter 57 of SBC 801.

415.9.1.9 Tank openings other than vents. Tank openings other than vents from tanks inside buildings shall be designed to ensure that liquids or vapor concentrations are not released inside the building.

Additional provisions are necessary to minimize the possibility of an accidental release of flammable or combustible liquids or their vapors via any connection to the tank other than a vent. This includes requirements for liquid-tight openings below the liquid level in the tank, overflow protection and vapor recovery connections as indicated in Section 5704.2.7.5 of SBC 801.

415.9.2 Liquefied petroleum gas facilities. The construction and installation of liquefied petroleum gas facilities shall be in accordance with the requirements of this code, SBC 801, SBC 501, SBC 1201 and NFPA 58.

The key to this section is the reference to NFPA 58 for design and construction of liquefied petroleum gas facilities. NFPA 58 provides a comprehensive set of construction requirements for LP-gas distribution facilities, as well as bulk plants, and industrial plants in which LP-gas systems, storage systems, vaporizers, mixing systems and similar activities are involved.
415.9.3 Dry cleaning plants. The construction and installation of dry-cleaning plants shall be in accordance with the requirements of this code, SBC 501, SBC 701 and NFPA 32. Dry cleaning solvents and systems shall be classified in accordance with SBC 801.

Dry cleaning plants that do not qualify under Item 4 or 5 of Section 307.1.1 and in which the maximum allowable quantity per control area of dry cleaning solvents exceeds the values in Table 307.1(1) would be classified in Group H and would be required to comply with the applicable provisions of SBC 701, SBC 501 and NFPA 32. It should be noted that Chapter 21 of SBC 801 also contains provisions for dry cleaning plants and references NFPA 32 for their maintenance. NFPA 32 contains provisions for the prevention and control of fire and explosion hazards associated with dry cleaning operations and for the protection of employees and the public. This standard addresses such issues as location, construction, building services, processes and equipment, and fire control.

415.10 Groups H-3 and H-4. Groups H-3 and H-4 shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of this code and SBC 801.

This section contains provisions that are applicable to all Group H-3 and H-4 occupancies in addition to material-specific requirements in SBC 801. These requirements assume that the Group H-3 and H-4 occupancies contain more than the maximum allowable quantities of hazardous materials per control area permitted by Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2). Sections 307.5 and 307.6 contain a list of those materials that could be present in Group H-3 and H-4 occupancies.

415.10.1 Flammable and combustible liquids. The storage, handling, processing and transporting of flammable and combustible liquids in Group H-3 occupancies shall be in accordance with Section 415.9.1.

This section refers back to Section 415.9.1, where the standards for the handling, storage and processing of these liquids are provided for both Group H-3 and H-2 occupancies.

415.10.2 Gas rooms. Where gas rooms are provided, such rooms shall be separated from other areas by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

In order to restrict the potential fire involvement of a storage room of hazardous gases within a Group H-3 or H-4 occupancy, a 1-hour fire-resistance-rated fire barrier, horizontal assemblies or both, are required to separate

===== Page 0361 =====
gas rooms from other adjacent areas. The required fire-resistance-rated 1-hour barrier separation is not due to a mixed-occupancy condition but rather further compartmentation in a Group H-3 or H-4 occupancy.

415.10.3 Floors in storage rooms. Floors in storage areas for corrosive liquids and highly toxic or toxic materials shall be of liquid-tight, noncombustible construction.

Storage rooms of corrosive liquids and highly toxic and toxic materials would be classified as a Group H-4 occupancy. Noncombustible floors are required to prevent the structure from contributing to a fire scenario. The floors are also required to be liquid tight to prevent the spread of liquids from a spill to areas outside the storage room. This also prevents the floor from absorbing the materials.

415.10.4 Separation highly toxic solids and liquids. Highly toxic solids and liquids not stored in approved hazardous materials storage cabinets shall be isolated from other hazardous materials storage by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

The potential involvement of materials that may be incompatible in storage situations with highly toxic solids and liquids must be addressed. The required degree of separation, either by approved cabinets or 1-hour fire-resistance-rated fire barrier and horizontal assembly construction, is also intended to restrict the highly toxic materials from other combustibles. Materials that are highly toxic or toxic may not have a fire hazard; however, these provisions will prevent a fire in other areas of the building from creating a release of these materials. This is another layer of compartmentation of hazards and is not related to fire area or occupancy separations.

415.11 Group H-5. In addition to the requirements set forth elsewhere in this code, Group H-5 shall comply with the provisions of Sections 415.11.1 through 415.11.12 and SBC 801.

This section contains the requirements for Group H-5 facilities that utilize HPM. Section 415.11 is intended to be a design option for buildings that utilize hazardous materials in excess of the maximum allowable quantities permitted by Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2). HPM facilities are considered unique high-hazard occupancies. The HPM occupancy classification assumes that while the manufacturing process involves the use of hazardous materials, the end product by itself is not hazardous.

The provisions of Section 415.11 resulted from non-uniform regulation of semiconductor fabrication facilities and are based on code changes submitted by groups associated with the semiconductor industry. These industries include electronic high-tech industries, such as semiconductor microchip fabrication, as well as the floppy disk and telecommunication industries. Additionally, there are other comparable activities involving similar technology that also use high-hazard materials. HPM include flammable liquids and gases, corrosives, oxidizers and, in many instances, highly toxic materials. The HPM may be a solid, liquid or gas with a degree of hazard rating in health, flammability or reactivity of Class 3 or 4 in accordance with NFPA 704, which is used directly in research, laboratory or production processes.

Structures that contain HPM facilities are required to meet the provisions of Section 415.11 as well as any other code provisions for a Group H-5 occupancy classification unless specifically modified in Section 415.11. Additionally, Chapter 27 of SBC 801 provides complementary fire safety controls that reduce the risks to an acceptable level in new and existing HPM buildings and fabrication areas.
415.11.1 Fabrication areas. Fabrication areas shall comply with Sections 415.11.1 through 415.11.8.

The fabrication area of an HPM facility is where the hazardous materials are actively handled and processed. The fabrication area includes accessory rooms and spaces such as workstations and employee dressing rooms.

415.11.1.1 Hazardous materials. Hazardous materials and hazardous production materials (HPM) shall comply with Sections 415.11.1.1 and 415.11.1.2.

Sections 415.11.1.1.1 and 415.11.1.1.2 regulate the quantities and densities of HPM for each fabrication area of a Group H-5 facility.

415.11.1.1 Aggregate quantities. The aggregate quantities of hazardous materials stored and used in a single fabrication area shall not exceed the quantities set forth in Table 415.11.1.1.

Exception: The quantity limitations for any hazard category in Table 415.11.1.1 shall not apply where the fabrication area contains quantities of hazardous materials not exceeding the maximum allowable quantities per control area established by Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2).

This Section regulates the total amount of hazardous materials, whether in use or storage, within a single fabrication area based on the density/quantity of material specified in Table 415.11.1.1. The exception permits a

===== Page 0362 =====
fabrication area to have a total quantity of HPM of either the quantity specified in Table 415.11.1.1.1 or the maximum allowable quantities per control area specified in Table 307.1(1) or 307.1(2), whichever is greater. For example, a small fabrication area may have a quantity in accordance with Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2) even though it may exceed the quantities specified in Table 415.11.1.1.1. Conversely, a large fabrication area may have an aggregate quantity that exceeds those specified in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2) where it does not exceed the quantities specified in Table 415.11.1.1.1.

Again, this Section refers to an aggregate quantity of hazardous materials that are in use and storage within a single fabrication area. Section 415.11.1.1.2 further limits the amount of HPM that is being stored within a fabrication area.

## See Table 415.11.1.1.1.

Table 415.11.1.1.1 controls the permitted densities/quantities of hazardous materials in a single fabrication area. In accordance with Section 415.11.1.1.1, the quantities permitted in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2) may be exceeded, provided the quantities in Table 415.11.1.1.1 are maintained subject to the storage limitations of Section 415.11.1.1.2. Note that this same limitation is not found in SBC 801. Conversely, the maximum quantities of Table 415.11.1.1.1 may be exceeded, provided the maximum allowable quantities of Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2) are not exceeded.

In accordance with Note a, hazardous materials in piping need not be included in evaluating the permitted quantity. Note b establishes that the maximum permitted amount is simply based on the maximum allowable quantities established in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2) rather than a calculated density. Note c provides an allowance for more densely packed baled cotton due to the decreased risks posed by this form of the material. This is consistent with Note o of Table 307.1(1).

Note d reflects industry practice and increases safety features to address these hazards. The  \( 255 \, m^{3} \)  limit was originally established during the 1980s when this concept was first being established in the model codes. This was representative of the quantity used at the time and the available safety features. At that time the industry used smaller cylinders, but more of them. The trend shifted to fewer but larger cylinders, but with additional controls such as reduced flow orifices (RFOs), sub-atmospheric gas delivery, better gas and flame detection, as well as other safety features. Now this note allows either a  \( 0.05 \, m^{3} \)  density or the  \( 255 \, m^{3} \)  total.

Note e recognizes the hazards posed by pyrophoric gases and limits the quantity within the fabrication area to be consistent with the threshold at which Table 415.6.5 would require a detached building, 55 m \( ^{3} \) .

Note f, along with the amounts permitted in the table for Class 3 water reactives, addresses advances in technology with the process termed Metal Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition (MOCVD). This technology deposits multiple thin films on a semiconductor wafer using a metal-organic vapor. The tools that employ this technology have on-board ampoules of solid metal organics (e.g. trimethylaluminum, trimethylgallium) that are pyrophoric and Class 3 water-reactives. The MOCVD process is considered a closed use system utilizing sealed ampoules or "bubblers" to prevent contact with water. The table allows a density in a single H5 fabrication area of 0.47 N/m \( ^{2} \)  of Class 3 water-reactive solids. A maximum quantity of 0.45 kg is set by this note for a single tool to reduce the overall risk. The maximum of 0.45 kg is consistent with open use in Table 307.1(1).

## 415.11.1.1.2 Hazardous production

materials. The maximum quantities of hazardous production materials (HPM) stored in a single fabrication area shall not exceed the maximum allowable quantities per control area established by Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2).

This Section provides the overall limit of HPM that can be stored within a single fabrication area based on Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2). Any storage in excess of the permitted maximum allowable quantities would be required to be stored in an HPM storage room, liquid storage room or gas room. The aggregate quantities of hazardous materials in both a storage and use condition within a single fabrication area are regulated by Section 415.11.1.1. Note that SBC 801 does not have a similar requirement limiting the overall amount of HPM materials based on the maximum allowable quantities. In addition, Section 415.11.1.1.1 notes that quantities shall be in accordance with Table 415.11.1.1. Note b to Table 415.11.1.1.1 does limit certain materials to the maximum allowable quantities of Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2), including combustible dust, combustible fibers, explosives, Class 1 organic peroxides, Class 4 oxidizers and Class 4 unstable (reactive), These materials tend to present higher hazards than other materials.

415.11.1.2 Separation. Fabrication areas, whose sizes are limited by the quantity of hazardous

===== Page 0363 =====
materials allowed by Table 415.11.1.1.1, shall be separated from each other, from corridors and from other parts of the building by not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

## Exceptions:

1. Doors within such fire barrier walls, including doors to corridors, shall be only self-closing fire door assemblies having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour.

2. Windows between fabrication areas and corridors are permitted to be fixed glazing listed and labeled for a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour in accordance with Section 716.

Fabrication areas must be separated from other parts of the building, egress corridors and other fabrication areas by fire barriers, horizontal assemblies, or both, having a fire-resistance rating of at least 1 hour. While the potential fire exposure could warrant a higher fire-resistance rating, the additional protection features indicative of a Group H-5 facility result in a 1-hour fire-resistance rating being acceptable. The fire barriers must be constructed in accordance with Section 707. The horizontal assemblies must be constructed in accordance with Section 711. One reason for separating one fabrication area from another is the limitation of HPM quantities in a single fabrication area. Where the need exists for quantities in excess of those permitted by Section 415.11.1.1, the area can be divided into two fabrication areas with 1-hour fire barriers and horizontal assemblies.

Exception 1 clarifies that all doors within the fire barrier walls that comprise the fabrication area must be self-closing and have a fire protection rating of 3/4 hour; therefore, where a corridor wall is also part of the fabrication area, a 3/4-hour opening protective would be required for the door opening. Openings in rated corridors that are not part of a fabrication area typically are required to only have a 20-minute fire protection rating. The doors are required to be self-closing since fabrication areas are "clean rooms" under positive pressure.

The 3/4-hour requirement of Exception 2 will permit the use of fire protection-rated glazing or wired glass windows in accordance with Section 716. The use of windows is often desirable to facilitate the security of activities in the fabrication area as well as an emergency response in the event of an accident.
415.11.1.3 Location of occupied levels. Occupied levels of fabrication areas shall be located at or above the first story above grade plane.

Due to the potential extensive use of hazardous materials, occupiable levels of fabrication areas are not permitted in basements or other areas below grade. Maintaining fabrication areas at or above grade aids in the egress of the occupants and access for fire department operations.

415.11.1.4 Floors. Except for surfacing, floors within fabrication areas shall be of noncombustible construction.

Openings through floors of fabrication areas are permitted to be unprotected where the interconnected levels are used solely for mechanical equipment directly related to such fabrication areas (see also Section 415.11.1.5).

Floors forming a part of an occupancy separation shall be liquid tight.

Fabrication area floors are required to be noncombustible. The intent of the requirement for noncombustible floors is to prevent the structure from being involved in the fire from a liquid that may seep into the floor system. The requirement is not intended to apply to floor-covering material.

This Section permits the interconnection of the operation floor and a mechanical floor, provided that the mechanical floor is essentially unoccupied. The intent is to prevent leakage past a required separation and to allow multiple-level fabrication areas where the space above or below the operation level is used for mechanical equipment, ducts and similar service equipment. Where a rated separation is required, the floors must be liquid tight. Whereas the hazards often involve liquids, floors are required to be liquid tight to prevent the spread of liquids from a spill to areas outside the fabrication area. "Liquid tight" requires that floors be sealed where they intersect with walls. This can be accomplished by a cove base of the same material as the floor.

415.11.1.5 Shafts and openings through floors. Elevator hoistways, vent shafts and other openings through floors shall be enclosed where required by Sections 712 and 713. Mechanical, duct and piping penetrations within a fabrication area shall not extend through more than two floors. The annular space around penetrations for cables, cable trays, tubing, piping, conduit or ducts shall be sealed at the floor level to restrict the movement of air. The fabrication area, including the areas through which the ductwork and piping extend, shall be considered to be a single conditioned environment.

===== Page 0364 =====
Section 712 specifies the conditions where a shaft enclosure or some other application of addressing vertical openings in multistory buildings is required. This section provides the requirements for specific opening penetrations through a floor within a fabrication area. The maximum number of stories that are allowed to be interconnected is three, since penetrations are limited to two floors. The penetrations for duct and piping are to have the annular space protected. Where such penetrations exist, the fire separation required by Section 415.11.1.2 is to separate the entire interconnected volume.

415.11.1.6 Ventilation. Mechanical exhaust ventilation at the rate of not less than 5.08 liters per second per square meter of floor area shall be provided throughout the portions of the fabrication area where HPM are used or stored. The exhaust air duct system of one fabrication area shall not connect to another duct system outside that fabrication area within the building.

A ventilation system shall be provided to capture and exhaust gases, fumes and vapors at workstations.

Two or more operations at a workstation shall not be connected to the same exhaust system where either one or the combination of the substances removed could constitute a fire, explosion or hazardous chemical reaction within the exhaust duct system.

Exhaust ducts penetrating fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 shall be contained in a shaft of equivalent fire-resistance-rated construction. Exhaust ducts shall not penetrate fire walls.

Fire dampers shall not be installed in exhaust ducts.

A major design factor is providing minimum ventilation. The minimum rate is 5.08 liters per second per square meter, or about eight air changes per hour for an 2.4 m fabrication area. Typically, at least 24 air changes per hour are provided for operational needs and where unclassified electrical systems are to be used. In order to prevent the spread of gases or fumes, the exhaust air duct system of any fabrication area must not be connected to any other ventilation system. With regard to workstations, the required ventilation system is intended to prevent exposure of the workstation operator to hazardous fumes or vapors and prevent hazardous concentrations of materials used in the manufacturing process. Additionally, ventilation systems must be designed to reduce the possibility of a chemical reaction occurring between two or more HPM or a material's and exhaust system's components. Where two or more chemicals may react dangerously where exhausted through a common duct, they must be removed separately.

Continuous ventilation through a duct enclosed in a fire-resistance rated shaft is required. Fire walls define separations between buildings. Ducts must never penetrate a barrier common to another building or occupancy. This reduces the likelihood of tampering with or interrupting the duct integrity.

Ventilation should not be interrupted by a fire damper when a fire or other emergency occurs involving a workstation. This helps reduce the likelihood that hazardous combustion byproducts or hazardous concentrations of HPM are not forced back into the workstation or clean room.

415.11.1.7 Transporting hazardous production materials to fabrication areas. HPM shall be transported to fabrication areas through enclosed piping or tubing systems that comply with Section 415.11.7, through service corridors complying with Section 415.11.3, or in corridors as permitted in the exception to Section 415.11.2. The handling or transporting of HPM within service corridors shall comply with SBC 801.

Except as permitted in the exception to Section 415.11.2 for existing facilities, all HPM must be transported to the fabrication area by service corridors or piping (see Sections 415.11.3 and 415.11.7). This reduces the chance that an egress route will be affected by an accidental leak or spill. Chapter 27 of SBC 801 contains additional requirements for the transport of HPM through all egress components as well as service corridors.

415.11.1.8 Electrical. Electrical equipment and devices within the fabrication area shall comply with NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401). The requirements for hazardous locations need not be applied where the average air change is not less than four times that set forth in Section 415.11.1.6 and where the number of air changes at any location is not less than three times that required by Section 415.11.1.6. The use of recirculated air shall be permitted.

Consistent with Chapter 27, electrical installations are required to comply with NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401). This Section specifically permits the dilution of concentrations of hazardous areas such that the hazardous location provisions of NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401) need not apply. This is because some of the equipment used in HPM facilities cannot comply with the hazardous location provisions of NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401). The nature of the

===== Page 0365 =====
fabrication process also dictates the use of the dilution concept. Typically, such facilities have a ventilation system designed to provide at least 24 air changes per hour.

At least 0.15 L/s per m \( ^{2} \)  or 24 air changes in a 2.4 m high fabrication area are required at all locations in order not to apply the hazardous location provisions of NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401). Also, an average rate of 0.20 L/s per m \( ^{2} \)  or 32 air changes in a 2.4 m high fabrication area are required if the hazardous location provisions of NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401) are not applied.

415.11.1.8.1 Workstations. Workstations shall not be energized without adequate exhaust ventilation. See Section 415.11.1.6 for workstation exhaust ventilation requirements.

Accidental exposure to flammable fumes or vapors can occur at workstations where hazardous materials are used. Either a mechanical or electrical interlock must be provided to engage the required exhaust ventilation system before HPM enters the workstation. This reduces the likelihood of gas or vapor exposure.

415.11.2 Corridors. Corridors shall comply with Chapter 10 and shall be separated from fabrication areas as specified in Section 415.11.1.2. Corridors shall not contain HPM and shall not be used for transporting such materials except through closed piping systems as provided in Section 415.11.7.4.

Exception: Where existing fabrication areas are altered or modified, HPM is allowed to be transported in existing corridors, subject to the following conditions:

1 Nonproduction HPM is allowed to be transported in corridors if utilized for maintenance, lab work and testing.

2 Where existing fabrication areas are altered or modified, HPM is allowed to be transported in existing corridors, subject to the following conditions:

2.1. Corridors. Corridors adjacent to the fabrication area where the alteration work is to be done shall comply with Section 1020 for a length determined as follows:

2.1.1 The length of the common wall of the corridor and the fabrication area; and

2.1.2 For the distance along the corridor to the point of entry of HPM into the corridor serving that fabrication area.
2.2. Emergency alarm system. There shall be an emergency telephone system, a local manual alarm station or other approved alarm initiating device within corridors at not more than 45 m intervals and at each exit and doorway. The signal shall be relayed to an approved central, proprietary or remote station service or the emergency control station and shall initiate a local audible alarm.

2.3. Pass-throughs. Self-closing doors having a fire protection rating of not less than 1 hour shall separate pass-throughs from existing corridors. Pass-throughs shall be constructed as required for the corridors and protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system.

Corridors are required to comply with the requirements of Section 1020 and must be separated from fabrication areas in accordance with Section 415.11.1.2. Additionally, typical egress corridors in new buildings are not to be used for transporting HPM to the fabrication area. In accordance with Section 415.11.1.7, HPM must be transported by service corridors or piping (see Sections 415.11.3 and 415.11.1.6, and Commentary Figure 415.11.2).

Exception 1 allows corridors to be used for the movement of HPM that is only used for maintenance purposes, laboratory work and testing activities.

Exception 2 addresses HPM facilities that existed before the adoption and enforcement of this section. It permits the transport of HPM in egress corridors in existing buildings under the conditions specified in Items 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3. Where alterations are made to a fabrication area, such corridors must be upgraded. Chapter 27 of SBC 801 provides additional requirements for the storage, handling and transporting of HPM in existing HPM facilities. Item 2.1 of the exception requires that corridors be upgraded to a 1-hour fire-resistance rating for the entire length of the wall common to the fabrication area. Additionally, the entire length of the corridor that is used for transporting HPM to the fabrication area being renovated must also be upgraded to have a 1-hour fire-resistance rating. Item 2.2 requires a means to notify trained personnel of an emergency condition in an egress corridor. A local alarm is required to alert the occupants of a potential hazardous condition. The intent of Item 2.3 is to permit a "pass-through" for providing HPM to a fabrication area. A pass-through, such as a storage cabinet, is used to store and receive HPM for the fabrication area. The pass-through

===== Page 0366 =====
must be separated from the egress corridor by 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction, including a 1-hour-rated self-closing fire door, and be protected by an automatic sprinkler system.

415.11.3 Service corridors. Service corridors within a Group H-5 occupancy shall comply with Sections 415.11.3.1 through 415.11.3.4.

This section regulates the corridor that may be used for the transport of HPM in a Group H-5 facility of new construction. For the transport of HPM via piping systems, see Section 415.11.7. It is also clarified that a potential separation due to the mixed occupancy provisions of Section 508.4 does not apply, since service corridors are considered part of the Group H-5 occupancy.

415.11.3.1 Use conditions. Service corridors shall be separated from corridors as required by Section 415.11.1.2. Service corridors shall not be used as a required corridor.

Service corridors are used for transporting HPM in lieu of piping. The separation between a service corridor and an egress corridor must be in accordance with Section 415.11.1.2. As such, a minimum 1-hour fire separation is required. Service corridors are also not intended to be used as a portion of the required means of egress.

415.11.3.2 Mechanical ventilation. Service corridors shall be mechanically ventilated as required by Section 415.11.1.6 or at not less than six air changes per hour.

Since the same HPM that may be present in the fabrication area may be transported in the service corridors, an adequate means of ventilation is required. This Section requires a ventilation rate of either 5 L/s/m \( ^{2} \)  of floor area in accordance with Section 415.11.1.6 or six air changes per hour, depending on the size and volume of the service corridor.

415.11.3.3 Means of egress. The distance of travel from any point in a service corridor to an exit, exit access corridor or door into a fabrication area shall be not greater than 23 m. Dead ends shall be not greater than 1.2 m in length. There shall be not less than two exits, and not more than one-half of the required means of egress shall require travel into a fabrication area. Doors from service corridors shall swing in the direction of egress travel and shall be self-closing.

The exit access travel distance is limited to 23 m, except that the travel distance may be measured from a door to a fabrication area. In order to minimize the potential for an occupant to be trapped in a service corridor, dead ends must not exceed 1.2 m. As such, the occupant would most likely be intimate with the source of the problem or located in an adjacent fabrication area from which egress is provided via exit access, not service, corridors.

An occupant at any location in a service corridor is required to have access to at least two means of egress. Not more than 50 percent of the means of egress may be through a fabrication area that, in most cases, will be one of the means of egress. This assumes that, should an incident or problem occur, it will be in either the service corridor or the fabrication area not both. Because of the potential for a hazardous condition, all doors to service corridors must be self-closing and swing in the direction of egress travel. Smoke-detector-actuated hold-open devices are not acceptable because smoke detectors may not respond to hazardous conditions that do not involve products of combustion.

415.11.3.4 Minimum width. The clear width of a service corridor shall be not less than 1.5 m, or 800 mm wider than the widest cart or truck used in the service corridor, whichever is greater.

The minimum width requirement for the service corridor is to provide adequate clearance to get around the device used to transport the HPM in the event it is involved in an emergency incident in the service corridor. The size of the transport carts and trucks depends on the type and quantity of materials utilized in the facility.

415.11.4 Emergency alarm system. Emergency alarm systems shall be provided in accordance with this section and Sections 415.5.1 and 415.5.2. The maximum allowable quantity per control area provisions shall not apply to emergency alarm systems required for HPM.

This section requires an emergency alarm system in all areas where HPM is transported or stored. The applicability of either Section 415.5.1 or 415.5.2 depends on whether the HPM material is in a storage or use condition. This section also clarifies that the requirement for an emergency alarm system in a Group H-5 facility in the locations identified in Sections 415.11.4.1 through 415.11.4.3 is not dependent on whether the maximum allowable quantities per control area of Table 307.1(1) or Table 307.1(2) are exceeded.

415.11.4.1 Service corridors. An emergency alarm system shall be provided in service corridors, with not fewer than one alarm device in each service corridor.

An emergency telephone system or manual alarm pull station is required in service corridors. Such devices must initiate an alarm at the emergency control station as well as activate a local audible device.

===== Page 0367 =====
415.11.4.2 Corridors and interior exit stairways and ramps. Emergency alarms for corridors, interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways shall comply with Section 415.5.2.

Since HPM would not be in exit access corridors or interior exit stairways unless they were being transported to another approved area, the emergency alarm requirements of Section 415.5.2 for dispensing, use and handling must be complied with.

415.11.4.3 Liquid storage rooms, HPM rooms and gas rooms. Emergency alarms for liquid storage rooms, HPM rooms and gas rooms shall comply with Section 415.5.1.

This section requires compliance with the emergency alarm requirements of Section 415.5.1 for hazardous materials in a storage condition. This section addresses storage areas, which by their designation contain HPM in quantities greater than those listed in Table 307.1(1) or Table 307.1(2).

415.11.4.4 Alarm-initiating devices. An approved emergency telephone system, local alarm manual pull stations, or other approved alarm-initiating devices are allowed to be used as emergency alarm-initiating devices.

This section classifies what constitutes an approved alarm-initiating device (see commentary, Section 415.5).

415.11.4.5 Alarm signals. Activation of the emergency alarm system shall sound a local alarm and transmit a signal to the emergency control station.

The alarm signal is required to be transmitted to the emergency control station in order to notify trained personnel of an emergency condition. A local alarm is required to alert the occupants of a potentially hazardous condition.

415.11.5 Storage of hazardous production materials. Storage of hazardous production materials (HPM) in fabrication areas shall be within approved or listed storage cabinets or gas cabinets or within a workstation. The storage of HPM in quantities greater than those listed in Section 5004.2 of SBC 801 shall be in liquid storage rooms, HPM rooms or gas rooms as appropriate for the materials stored. The storage of other hazardous materials shall be in accordance with other applicable provisions of this code and SBC 801.

Section 415.11.5 addresses general storage provisions for HPM in a Group H-5 facility. Even though the amount of HPM in a fabrication area is controlled, it still must be within approved cabinets or a workstation. This requirement is intended to limit the exposure to occupants of the fabrication area to only the material in use within that area.
The larger amounts of HPM typically stored in separate areas present a hazard comparable to other Group H facilities; therefore, such storage rooms need to meet similar code requirements. Storage rooms containing HPM in quantities greater than permitted by Section 2704.2 of SBC 801 are required to comply with the applicable provisions of Sections 415.11.6.1 through 415.11.6.9, depending on the state of the material.

415.11.6 HPM rooms, gas rooms, liquid storage room construction. HPM rooms, gas rooms and liquid shall be constructed in accordance with Sections 415.11.6.1 through 415.11.6.9.

Sections 415.11.6.1 through 415.11.6.9 selectively address construction requirements for two types of storage rooms: those classified as HPM rooms or gas rooms, and those utilized as liquid storage rooms. The size and separation of such rooms is dependent on the type of materials stored.

415.11.6.1 HPM rooms and gas rooms. HPM rooms and gas rooms shall be separated from other areas by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. The fire-resistance rating shall be not less than 2 hours where the area is 28 m \( ^{2} \)  or more and not less than 1 hour where the area is less than 28 m \( ^{2} \) .

The amount of hazardous material in an HPM room or gas room is only limited by room size; therefore, since storage rooms in excess of 28 m² are not limited by size or quantity of hazardous material, construction of fire barriers and horizontal assemblies of not less than 2-hour fire-resistance rating is required. It should be noted that this section assumes the storage areas have at least one exterior wall with a minimum 9 m fire separation distance (see Section 415.11.6.4). where the room has an area of less than 28 m², the construction can be rated for 1 hour.

415.11.6.2 Liquid storage rooms. Liquid storage rooms shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

1 Rooms greater than  \( 46 \, m^{2} \)  in area, shall have not fewer than one exterior door approved for fire department access.

2 Rooms shall be separated from other areas by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. The fire-resistance rating shall be not less than 1 hour for rooms up to  \( 14 \, m^{2} \)  in area and not less than 2 hours where the room is more than  \( 14 \, m^{2} \)  in area.

===== Page 0368 =====
3 Shelving, racks and wainscotting in such areas shall be of noncombustible construction or wood of not less than 25 mm nominal thickness or fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Section 2303.2.

4 Rooms used for the storage of Class I flammable liquids shall not be located in a basement.

This Section assumes storage rooms are utilized for the storage of flammable and combustible liquids in closed containers. The size of the rooms is severely restricted where only 1-hour fire barriers and 1-hour horizontal assemblies are provided to limit the size of a potential fire. For rooms greater than 14 m² in area, a minimum 2-hour-rated construction is required because the size of the room or quantity of hazardous materials is not limited. Due to the need for readily available access in a fire scenario, all liquid storage rooms in excess of 46 m² must have at least one exterior door that provides access to the room. In accordance with Section 415.11.6.4, all liquid storage rooms, regardless of size, must have at least one exterior wall.

The construction limitations on the shelving racks and wainscotting are intended to limit their potential involvement in a fire scenario. Due to the volatile nature of Class I flammable liquids and the need for quick fire department access, they must be located in liquid storage rooms at or above grade.

415.11.6.3 Floors. Except for surfacing, floors of HPM rooms and liquid storage rooms shall be of noncombustible liquid-tight construction. Raised grating over floors shall be of noncombustible materials.

Similar to the floor construction of fabrication areas, the floors of HPM rooms and liquid storage rooms are required to be noncombustible and liquid tight (see commentary, Section 415.11.4).

415.11.6.4 Location. Where HPM rooms, liquid storage rooms and gas rooms are provided, they shall have not fewer than one exterior wall and such wall shall be not less than 9 m from lot lines, including lot lines adjacent to public ways.

Access from the exterior for fire-fighting operations is essential for storage rooms of hazardous materials. These rooms by their designation contain more than the maximum allowable quantities per control area listed in Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2). The 9 m limitation is based in part on the fact that the exterior wall need not have a fire-resistance rating, depending on the construction type of the building (see Table 705.5). Such walls may also be used for explosion venting where such venting is required.

415.11.6.5 Explosion control. Explosion control shall be provided where required by Section 414.5.1.

This section requires a method of explosion control only when an explosion hazard exists. Not all storage rooms are required to have explosion control. Section 414.5.1 requires a method of explosion control, such as explosion venting or barricade construction, depending on the specific hazardous material involved in accordance with SBC 801. Table 414.5.1 provides guidance as to where explosion control is required for various hazardous materials.

415.11.6.6 Exits. Where two exits are required from HPM rooms, liquid storage rooms and gas rooms, one shall be directly to the outside of the building.

Depending on the common path of egress travel available in accordance with Section 1006.2.1, two exits may be required from all HPM rooms, liquid storage rooms and gas rooms. For example, a liquid storage room containing Class IB flammable liquids in normally closed containers would be considered a Group H-3 occupancy. As such, a maximum common path of travel of 7.5 m would be permitted before a second exit, one of which leads directly to the exterior, is required. Storage rooms are required to be located along an exterior wall. In addition to the requirements of this Section, all liquid storage rooms in excess of 46 m² are required to have at least one exterior door, regardless of travel distance.

415.11.6.7 Doors. Doors in a fire barrier wall, including doors to corridors, shall be self-closing fire door assemblies having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour.

Doors that are in an interior wall that comprises part of the storage room enclosure are required to have a minimum 3/4-hour fire protection rating. The actual rating is dependent on the fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier separation required. While a 1-hour fire barrier would permit a door with a 3/4-hour fire protection rating, a 2-hour fire barrier would require a door to have a 1½-hour fire protection rating in accordance with Table 716.1(2).

415.11.6.8 Ventilation. Mechanical exhaust ventilation shall be provided in liquid storage rooms, HPM rooms and gas rooms at the rate of not less than 5 L/s/m \( ^{2} \)  of floor area or six air changes per hour.

Exhaust ventilation for gas rooms shall be designed to operate at a negative pressure in relation to the

===== Page 0369 =====
surrounding areas and direct the exhaust ventilation to an exhaust system.

Similar to fabrication areas and service corridors, mechanical exhaust ventilation is required in liquid storage rooms, HPM rooms and gas rooms (see commentary, Sections 415.11.1.6 and 415.11.3.2).

415.11.6.9 Emergency alarm system. An approved emergency alarm system shall be provided for HPM rooms, liquid storage rooms and gas rooms.

Emergency alarm-initiating devices shall be installed outside of each interior exit door of such rooms.

Activation of an emergency alarm-initiating device shall sound a local alarm and transmit a signal to the emergency control station.

An approved emergency telephone system, local alarm manual pull stations or other approved alarm-initiating devices are allowed to be used as emergency alarm-initiating devices.

An emergency alarm system is required for all storage rooms containing hazardous materials in excess of the quantities permitted in Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2). See the commentary to Section 415.11.4 for similar emergency alarm requirements.

415.11.7 Piping and tubing. Hazardous production materials piping and tubing shall comply with this section and ASME B31.3.

This section addresses the design requirements for all piping and tubing utilized to transport HPM throughout a Group H-5 facility, including where it can be located within the building.

The nature of the HPM involved requires strict control of both the materials used in piping and the joint methods used to avoid leakage. ASME B31.3 provides criteria for piping installation applicable to HPM facilities.

415.11.7.1 HPM having a health-hazard ranking of 3 or 4. Systems supplying HPM liquids or gases having a health-hazard ranking of 3 or 4 shall be welded throughout, except for connections, to the systems that are within a ventilated enclosure if the material is a gas, or an approved method of drainage or containment is provided for the connections if the material is a liquid.

The primary purpose of this Section is to minimize the potential for a leak of HPM. The use of mechanical compression-type fittings or other nonwelded joints in systems carrying HPM with a health-hazard ranking of 3 or 4 must be limited to areas where any leaks will be vented and the materials exhausted. Where the material is a liquid, then a method of drainage or containment is required to minimize the hazard.

415.11.7.2 Location in service corridors. Hazardous production materials supply piping or tubing in service corridors shall be exposed to view.

Concealment of piping in service corridors must be avoided to provide a means of monitoring for leaks.

415.11.7.3 Excess flow control. Where HPM gases or liquids are carried in pressurized piping above 101.3 kPa, excess flow control shall be provided. Where the piping originates from within a liquid storage room, HPM room or gas room, the excess flow control shall be located within the liquid storage room, HPM room or gas room. Where the piping originates from a bulk source, the excess flow control shall be located as close to the bulk source as practical.

Excess flow control valves regulate the flow of hazardous materials within the piping system. The valves are designed to shut off in the event the pre-determined flow is exceeded.

415.11.7.4 Installations in corridors and above other occupancies. The installation of HPM piping and tubing within the space defined by the walls of corridors and the floor or roof above, or in concealed spaces above other occupancies, shall be in accordance with Sections 415.11.7.1 through 415.11.7.3 and the following conditions:

1 Automatic sprinklers shall be installed within the space unless the space is less than 150 mm in the least dimension.

2 Ventilation not less than six air changes per hour shall be provided. The space shall not be used to convey air from any other area.

3 Where the piping or tubing is used to transport HPM liquids, a receptor shall be installed below such piping or tubing. The receptor shall be designed to collect any discharge or leakage and drain it to an approved location. The 1-hour enclosure shall not be used as part of the receptor.

4 HPM supply piping and tubing and nonmetallic waste lines shall be separated from the corridor and from occupancies other than Group H-5 by fire barriers or by an approved method or assembly that has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour. Access openings into the enclosure shall be protected by approved fire protection-rated assemblies.

5 Readily accessible manual or automatic remotely activated fail-safe emergency shutoff valves shall be installed on piping

===== Page 0370 =====
and tubing other than waste lines at the following locations:

5.1 At branch connections into the fabrication area.

5.2 At entries into corridors.

Exception: Transverse crossings of the corridors by supply piping that is enclosed within a ferrous pipe or tube for the width of the corridor need not comply with Items 1 through 5.

The installation of HPM piping in the space above an egress corridor or another occupancy, as well as the cavity of the egress corridor wall, present a potential source of hazard to the building's occupants. The five requirements provided for such installations serve to mitigate the hazard by suppression, ventilation, containment and ignition control. In order to address the potential hazards, the containment must be a fire barrier with at least a 1-hour fire-resistance rating, drainage receptors, excess flow control and shutoff valves.

Where the piping traverses a corridor, the use of a coaxial enclosed pipe around the HPM piping is considered acceptable for providing the required separation and containment of a potential leak. The assumption is that the open ends of that pipe are in an HPM facility and, therefore, a leak into the outer casing can be monitored. where the adjacent areas that contain the open ends are not in an HPM facility, then the outer-jacket method cannot be used.

415.11.7.5 Identification. Piping, tubing and HPM waste lines shall be identified in accordance with ANSI A13.1 to indicate the material being transported.

To facilitate monitoring, detecting and controlling any possible leaks, all piping, tubing and HPM waste lines must be identified in accordance with ANSI A13.1. This standard contains criteria for properly identifying the piping system, including labeling and frequency or distribution of the signs or labels.

415.11.8 Continuous gas detection systems. A gas detection system complying with Section 916 shall be provided for HPM gases where the physiological warning threshold level of the gas is at a higher level than the accepted permissible exposure limit (PEL) for the gas and for flammable gases in accordance with Sections 415.11.8.1 through 415.11.8.2.

A gas detection system in the room or area utilized for the storage or use of HPM gases provides early notification of a leak that is occurring before the escaping gas reaches hazardous concentration levels.
415.11.8.1 Where required. A continuous gas detection system shall be provided in the areas identified in Sections 415.11.8.1 through 415.11.8.1.4.

Sections 415.11.8.1.1 through 415.11.8.1.4 prescribe the locations in a Group H-5 facility where a gas detection system is required.

415.11.8.1.1 Fabrication areas. A continuous gas detection system shall be provided in fabrication areas where HPM gas is used in the fabrication area.

All fabrication areas that utilize HPM gases must have a gas detection system. It should be noted that gas detection is often installed within workstations as a means of early detection of leaks. Such detection is generally not acceptable as an alternative to gas detection for the fabrication area, since a leak may occur remotely from the workstation.

415.11.8.1.2 HPM rooms. A continuous gas detection system shall be provided in HPM rooms where gas is used in the room.

HPM rooms, which by definition contain more than the quantities of hazardous materials per control area permitted by Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2), are required to have a gas detection system.

415.11.8.1.3 Gas cabinets, exhausted enclosures and gas rooms. A gas detection system shall be provided in gas cabinets and exhausted enclosures for HPM gas. A gas detection system shall be provided in gas rooms where HPM gases are not located in gas cabinets or exhausted enclosures.

In the potential event of a leaking cylinder of a hazardous gas, gas cabinets, exhausted enclosures and gas rooms must have a gas detection system.

415.11.8.1.4 Corridors. Where gases are transported in piping placed within the space defined by the walls of a corridor and the floor or roof above the corridor, a continuous gas detection system shall be provided where piping is located and in the corridor.

Exception: A continuous gas detection system is not required for occasional transverse crossings of the corridors by supply piping that is enclosed in a ferrous pipe or tube for the width of the corridor.

In addition to the requirements of Section 415.11.7.4 for HPM piping and tubing in an egress corridor, a gas detection system is required for early notification of a potential leak of an HPM gas.

===== Page 0371 =====
The exception is similar to the exception in Section 415.11.7.4. In essence, the gas detection system required by this Section as well as the additional provisions in Section 415.11.7.4 are not required where the exception is met (see commentary, Section 415.11.7.4).

## 415.11.8.2 Gas detection system operation.

The gas detection system shall be capable of monitoring the room, area or equipment in which the HPM gas is located at or below all the following gas concentrations:

1 Immediately dangerous to life and health (IDLH) values where the monitoring point is within an exhausted enclosure, ventilated enclosure or gas cabinet.

2 Permissible exposure limit (PEL) levels where the monitoring point is in an area outside an exhausted enclosure, ventilated enclosure or gas cabinet.

3 For flammable gases, the monitoring detection threshold level shall be vapor concentrations in excess of 25 percent of the lower flammable limit (LFL) where the monitoring is within or outside an exhausted enclosure, ventilated enclosure or gas cabinet.

4 Except as noted in this section, monitoring for highly toxic and toxic gases shall also comply with Chapter 60 of SBC 801.

This Section requires gas detection systems to be capable of sensing a leak at or below the permissible exposure limit (PEL). This exposure limit, regulated by OSHA to prevent adverse health effects, is the breathing zone exposure limit for employees over an 8-hour time-weighted average. Monitoring in the semiconductor industry is designed to detect and alert employees of leaks inside exhausted enclosures, ventilated enclosures and gas cabinets, and is not intended to estimate potential employee breathing zone exposures. The semiconductor industry addressed this by codifying Section 7.1.6.3.2 of NFPA 318 to differentiate gas detection set points in exhausted enclosures (set at the IDLH values) from gas detection where the monitoring point is in an area outside an exhausted enclosure, ventilated enclosure or gas cabinet (set at PEL). This Section is consistent with the provisions of Section 7.1.6.3.2 of NFPA 318 requirements that are much more relevant to the type of monitoring performed in semiconductor manufacturing (inside exhausted enclosures, ventilated enclosures or gas cabinets). Additionally, the 25 percent LFL is consistent with both Section 510.2 of SBC 501 and Section 7.1.6.3.2 of NFPA 318.
Chapter 60 of SBC 801 contains additional requirements for the monitoring of highly toxic and toxic compressed gases.

415.11.8.2.1 Alarms. The gas detection system shall initiate a local alarm and transmit a signal to the emergency control station when a short-term hazard condition is detected. The alarm shall be both visual and audible and shall provide warning both inside and outside the area where the gas is detected. The audible alarm shall be distinct from all other alarms.

The required local alarm is intended to alert occupants to a hazardous condition in the vicinity of where the HPM gases are being stored or used. The alarm is not intended to be an evacuation alarm; however, it is required to be monitored to reduce emergency personnel response time.

415.11.8.2.2 Shutoff of gas supply. The gas detection system shall automatically close the shutoff valve at the source on gas supply piping and tubing related to the system being monitored for which gas is detected when a short-term hazard condition is detected. Automatic closure of shutoff valves shall comply with the following:

1 Where the gas detection sampling point initiating the gas detection system alarm is within a gas cabinet or exhausted enclosure, the shutoff valve in the gas cabinet or exhausted enclosure for the specific gas automatically close.

2 Where the gas detection sampling point initiating the gas detection system alarm is within a room and compressed gas containers are not in gas cabinets or an exhausted enclosure, the shutoff valves on all gas lines for the specific gas detected shall automatically close.

3 Where the gas detection sampling point initiating the gas detection system alarm is within a piping distribution manifold enclosure, the shutoff valve supplying the manifold for the compressed gas container of the specific gas detected shall automatically close.

Exception: Where the gas detection sampling point initiating the gas detection system alarm is at the use location or within a gas valve enclosure of a branch line downstream of a piping distribution manifold, the shutoff valve for the branch line located in the piping distribution manifold enclosure shall automatically close.

===== Page 0372 =====
Where gas detection systems are required, automatic emergency shutoff valves are required to stop the flow of hazardous material from possibly deteriorating further in an emergency. This Section also clarifies where such shutoffs are required to be located and what specifically is required to be shut off depending on where the gas is detected.

415.11.9 Manual fire alarm system. An approved manual fire alarm system shall be provided throughout buildings containing Group H-5. Activation of the alarm system shall initiate a local alarm and transmit a signal to the emergency control station. The fire alarm system shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section 907.

Due to the type and potential quantities of hazardous materials that could be present in a Group H-5 facility, a manual means of activating an evacuation alarm is essential for the safety of the occupants in an emergency situation. The alarm signal must be transmitted to the emergency control station. The fire alarm must also be in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 907 and NFPA 72. Section 907.2.5 also specifically requires this system.

415.11.10 Emergency control station. An emergency control station shall be provided in accordance with Sections 415.11.10.1 through 415.11.10.3.

Due to the extent of hazardous materials permitted in an HPM facility, an approved on-site location is needed where the alarm signals from emergency equipment can be received.

415.11.10.1 Location. The emergency control station shall be located on the premises at an approved location outside the fabrication area.

The emergency control station must be located on-site at a location approved by the building official. The emergency control station must not be located in an area where hazardous materials are stored, used or transported, such as a fabrication area.

415.11.10.2 Staffing. Trained personnel shall continuously staff the emergency control station.

Appropriate response by trained personnel is essential to any emergency event involving HPM materials.

415.11.10.3 Signals. The emergency control station shall receive signals from emergency equipment and alarm and detection systems. Such emergency equipment and alarm and detection systems shall include, but not be limited to, the following where such equipment or systems are required to be provided either in this chapter or elsewhere in this code:
1 Automatic sprinkler system alarm and monitoring systems.

2 Manual fire alarm systems.

3 Emergency alarm systems.

4 Gas detection systems.

5 Smoke detection systems.

6 Emergency power system.

7 Automatic detection and alarm systems for pyrophoric liquids and Class 3 water-reactive liquids required in Section 2705.2.3.4 of SBC 801.

8 Exhaust ventilation flow alarm devices for pyrophoric liquids and Class 3 water-reactive liquids cabinet exhaust ventilation systems required in Section 2705.2.3.4 of SBC 801.

This section specifies the types of systems that are to be monitored by the emergency control station.

415.11.11 Emergency power system. An emergency power system shall be provided in Group H-5 occupancies in accordance with Section 2702. The emergency power system shall supply power automatically to the electrical systems specified in Section 415.11.11.1 when the normal electrical supply system is interrupted.

A backup emergency power source is considered essential for systems that are monitoring and protecting hazardous materials in a Group H-5 occupancy. Without an emergency power system, all required electrical controls or equipment monitoring hazardous materials would be rendered inoperative if a power failure or other electrical system failure were to occur.

415.11.11.1 Required electrical systems. Emergency power shall be provided for electrically operated equipment and connected control circuits for the following systems:

1 HPM exhaust ventilation systems.

2 HPM gas cabinet ventilation systems.

3 HPM exhausted enclosure ventilation systems.

4 HPM gas room ventilation systems.

5 HPM gas detection systems.

6 Emergency alarm systems.

7 Manual and automatic fire alarm systems.

8 Automatic sprinkler system monitoring and alarm systems.

9 Automatic alarm and detection systems for pyrophoric liquids and Class 3 water-reactive liquids required in Section 2705.2.3.4 of SBC 801.

10 Flow alarm switches for pyrophoric liquids and Class 3 water-reactive liquids cabinet exhaust ventilation systems required in Section 2705.2.3.4 of SBC 801.

===== Page 0373 =====
11 Electrically operated systems required elsewhere in this code or in SBC 801 applicable to the use, storage or handling of HPM.

This Section specifies the types of systems within a Group H-5 occupancy that are required to be connected to an approved emergency power system. As indicated in Section 2702, all emergency power systems must be installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401), NFPA 110 and 111.

415.11.11.2 Exhaust ventilation systems. Exhaust ventilation systems are allowed to be designed to operate at not less than one-half the normal fan speed on the emergency power system where it is demonstrated that the level of exhaust will maintain a safe atmosphere.

Emergency power for exhaust ventilation is required to prevent hazardous concentrations of HPM fumes or vapors in areas such as workstations or fabrication areas. Fans for exhaust ventilation draw a considerable amount of current when operating. Running exhaust fans at a reduced speed may be desirable where it will not endanger the operator or result in a hazardous condition. However, an exhaust fan must not be run at a speed less than 50 percent of its rating, even if a slower speed will not produce a serious hazard.

415.11.12 Automatic sprinkler system protection in exhaust ducts for HPM. An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in exhaust ducts conveying gases, vapors, fumes, mists or dusts generated from HPM in accordance with Sections 415.11.12.1 through 415.11.12.3 and SBC 501.

This section prescribes the sprinkler system requirements for exhaust ducts for HPM. The requirements depend on the construction materials of the exhaust duct.

An exhaust duct for HPM materials could convey flammable and combustible gases, fumes, vapors or ducts. To provide protection against the spread of fire within the exhaust system and to prevent a duct fire from involving the building, sprinkler protection is required in the exhaust duct. The use of an extinguishing agent other than water, based on agent compatibility, would be subject to local approval. Section 510 of SBC 501 contains additional requirements for protecting hazardous exhaust systems.

415.11.12.1 Metallic and noncombustible nonmetallic exhaust ducts. An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in metallic and noncombustible nonmetallic exhaust ducts where all of the following conditions apply:

1 Where the largest cross-sectional diameter is equal to or greater than 250 mm.

2 The ducts are within the building.

3 The ducts are conveying flammable gases, vapors or fumes.

Essentially automatic sprinklers are required within each individual duct where all three of the following conditions exist:

1 Cross-sectional diameter at the widest point is equal to or exceeds 250 mm.

2 Ducts are located within the building.

3 Ducts convey gases or vapors within the flammable range.

Figure 415.11.12.1 illustrates how to measure the cross-sectional diameter of various duct shapes. Provisions of this Section require the square and rounded ducts to be protected by automatic sprinklers. The round or elliptical ducts depicted on the right side of Commentary Figure 415.11.12.1 are not required to be protected.

415.11.12.2 Combustible nonmetallic exhaust ducts. Automatic sprinkler system protection shall be provided in combustible nonmetallic exhaust ducts where the largest cross-sectional diameter of the duct is equal to or greater than 250 mm.

Exception: Ducts need not be provided with automatic sprinkler protection as follows:

1 Ducts listed or approved for applications without automatic sprinkler system protection.

2 Ducts not more than 4 m in length installed below ceiling level.

Galvanized steel is not an appropriate duct material for all substances handled in the broad category of hazardous exhaust systems. A duct material compatible with the exhaust must be selected, and factors such as corrosiveness, abrasion resistance, chemical resistance and operating temperatures must be taken into account. Section 510.8 of SBC 501 contains additional provisions for duct construction that is part of a hazardous exhaust system. As such, automatic sprinkler protection is also required for all combustible nonmetallic ducts with a cross-sectional diameter equal to or greater than 250 mm.

Exception 1 states that automatic sprinklers are not required where the risk to people or property is limited, such as where nonmetallic ducts approved for installation without sprinklers are used. Exception 2 states that where ducts do not exceed 4 m in length and

===== Page 0374 =====
are installed exposed below ceiling level, sprinklers may be omitted. The limited duct length and exposure reduces the potential of a concealed fire hazard.

415.11.12.3 Automatic sprinkler locations. Sprinkler systems shall be installed at 4 m intervals in horizontal ducts and at changes in direction. In vertical ducts, sprinklers shall be installed at the top and at alternate floor levels.

Adequate automatic sprinkler coverage needs to be maintained to prevent the spread of fire within the exhaust system. All sprinkler system components must also be in compliance with the applicable provisions of NFPA 13.

## SECTION 416 SPRAY APPLICATION OF FLAMMABLE FINISHES

416.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to the construction, installation and use of buildings and structures, or parts thereof, for the spray application of flammable finishes. Operations and equipment shall comply with SBC 801.

The principal hazards associated with paint spraying and spray booths originate from the presence of flammable liquids or powders and their vapors or mists. The purpose of this Section is to provide requirements that address the hazards associated with spray applications and dipping or coating applications involving flammable paints, varnishes and lacquers. The requirements provided include such topics as ventilation, automatic sprinklers, control of ignition sources and proper operation of the equipment. In addition to the provisions of this Section, the provisions of SBC 501 and Chapter 24 of SBC 801 also apply.

The provisions of this Section apply to the indoor use of spray applications and dipping or coating applications involving flammable paints, varnishes and lacquers. Outdoor applications involving flammable paints, varnishes and lacquers are not covered, since overspray deposits are not likely to create hazardous conditions, and flammable vapor-air mixtures are minimized because of atmospheric dilution. Safeguards, such as ventilation, ignition control, material storage and waste disposal (see Chapter 24 of SBC 801), should still apply. This reference to SBC 801 and its provisions regarding flammable finishes covers the application of flammable or combustible materials where applied as a spray by compressed air, via "airless" or "hydraulic atomization" steam, electrostatically, or by any other means in continuous or intermittent processes. They also cover the application of combustible powders where applied by powder spray guns, electrostatic powder spray guns, fluidized beds or electrostatic fluidized beds. SBC 801 and its
referenced standards contain provisions relating to the location of spray areas, ignition sources, ventilation, liquid storage and handling, protection, operation, maintenance and training. The provisions found in Chapter 24 of SBC 801 also apply to: processes in which articles or materials are passed through the contents of tanks, vats or containers of flammable or combustible liquids, including dipping, roll, flow and curtain coating, finishing, treating, cleaning, and similar processes. Requirements for the location of dipping and coating processes, ventilation, equipment construction, liquid storage and handling, protection, operation, maintenance and training are also provided.

416.2 Spray rooms. Spray rooms shall be enclosed with not less than 1-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. Floors shall be waterproofed and drained in an approved manner.

A spray room is a power-ventilated, fully enclosed room used exclusively for open spraying of flammable and combustible materials. The entire spray room is considered the spray area. The primary difference between a spray room and a spray booth is that spray booths are partially open. A spray room is to be enclosed with fire barriers and horizontal assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of at least 1 hour. Waterproof floors are to be arranged to drain to the outside of the building, to internal drains or to other suitable places. Properly designed and guarded drains or scuppers of sufficient number and size to dispose of all surplus water likely to be discharged by automatic sprinklers must be provided. Section 2404.3.2 requires that combustible floor construction be covered with an approved noncombustible, nonsparking material.

416.2.1 Construction. Walls and ceilings of spray rooms shall be constructed of noncombustible materials, or the interior surface shall be completely covered with noncombustible materials. Aluminum shall not be used.

As the material being sprayed is flammable, it is critical that the surfaces of the spray room be of noncombustible materials. The construction of the room should be such that it does not contribute to any fire that might happen to occur. It should be noted that Section 2404.6.2 of SBC 801 limits the type and design of illumination fixtures installed in these rooms.

416.2.2 Surfaces. The interior surfaces of spray rooms shall be smooth and shall be so constructed to permit the free passage of exhaust air from all parts of the interior and to facilitate washing and

===== Page 0375 =====
cleaning and shall be so designed to confine residues within the room.

Rough, corrugated or uneven surfaces are difficult to clean. Periodic cleaning of interior surfaces reduces the fire hazard posed by the accumulation of flammable or combustible coatings. Due to the physical properties of aluminum, it is unsuitable for cleaning and scraping of overspray residue.

416.2.3 Ventilation. Mechanical ventilation and interlocks with the spraying operation shall be in accordance with SBC 801 and SBC 501.

The provisions addressing ventilation in spray rooms where flammable finishes are applied are found in Sections 502.7 of SBC 501 and 2404.7 of SBC 801. For effective ventilation, the system must run continuously during the spraying operation phase and the drying phase of the process when vapors are generated. The required interlocks between the ventilation and spraying equipment is intended to reduce the likelihood that the operator will fail to activate the ventilation system prior to use of the spray equipment. SBC 801 ventilation requirements cover many areas and will have an impact on the design of such rooms and the buildings containing them.

416.3 Spraying spaces. Spraying spaces shall be ventilated with an exhaust system to prevent the accumulation of flammable mist or vapors in accordance with SBC 501. Where such spaces are not separately enclosed, noncombustible spray curtains shall be provided to restrict the spread of flammable vapors.

The objective of ventilation is to remove flammable vapors and mists so as to minimize the potential for a flash fire or explosion. The spray area is required to be ventilated in accordance with the provisions of SBC 501. Where the spray process is not separated from the other operations or areas, a noncombustible spray curtain must be provided to restrict the spread of flammable vapors. SBC 801 requires ventilation systems and enclosures to be interlocks with the spraying equipment to ensure that fans operate, and doors remain closed when in use.

416.3.1 Surfaces. The interior surfaces of spraying spaces shall be smooth; shall be so constructed to permit the free passage of exhaust air from all parts of the interior and to facilitate washing and cleaning; and shall be so designed to confine residues within the spraying space. Aluminum shall not be used.

See the commentary to Section 416.2.2.

416.4 Spray booths. Spray booths shall be designed, constructed and operated in accordance with SBC 801.
Detailed requirements for the design and construction of spray booths are given in Section 2404.3.3 of SBC 801. SBC 801 also addresses requirements for ventilation of adjacent areas, fire protection, fire extinguishers, control of ignition sources, housekeeping during operations, lighting and operation control through interlocks.

416.5 Fire protection. An automatic sprinkler system or fire-extinguishing system shall be provided in all spray rooms and spray booths and shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 9.

Spray application operations are to be protected with an automatic sprinkler system or fire-extinguishing system. While an automatic sprinkler system is the most desirable type of suppression system, this Section would allow the use of other effective extinguishing agents, such as dry chemical or foam. Because of the ease of ignition of flammable liquids, specifically spray paint applications of a flammable liquid, an automatic fire sprinkler system or fire-extinguishing system is required in rooms in which spray painting is conducted, as well as rooms in which flammable materials are used for painting, brushing, dipping or mixing on a regular basis. Dry sprinklers should not be used for the protection of spray operations, except possibly at the exhaust duct penetrations to the outside. Wet pipe, preaction or deluge systems should be used so that water is placed on the fire in the shortest possible time. Where the entire building is not protected with an automatic sprinkler system, then the system protecting the spray booth or room may be a limited area sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.8. Locating sprinklers in paint spray booths presents an unusual problem, since the sprinkler may become clogged with paint. The most satisfactory solution is to locate the sprinklers in areas in a way that the paint spray will most likely not reach the sprinkler. Even in the most ideal locations, the sprinkler will need to be cleaned frequently. A coating of grease with a low melting point, such as petroleum jelly, motor oil or a soft neutral soap, will facilitate cleaning of the sprinkler. Other alternatives that are commonly used include cellophane bags with a thickness of 0.076 mm or less or thin paper bags to protect the sprinklers. These coverings will likely need to be changed frequently due to the buildup of spray residue. Additional guidance on fire protection requirements for the application of flammable finishes can be found in Chapter 24 of SBC 801.

===== Page 0376 =====
## SECTION 417 DRYING ROOMS

417.1 General. A drying room or dry kiln installed within a building shall be constructed entirely of approved noncombustible materials or assemblies of such materials regulated by the approved rules or as required in the general and specific sections of this chapter for special occupancies and where applicable to the general requirements of SBC 501.

This section establishes specific safety requirements for drying rooms and dry kilns used in conjunction with the drying (accelerated seasoning) of lumber, and dryers or dehydrators used to reduce the moisture content of agricultural products. Included are drying operations for other combustible materials, such as certain building materials, textiles and fabrics. Drying operations associated with the application of flammable finishes are regulated by Section 416. The hazards associated with drying rooms and dry kilns relate to the volume of readily combustible materials being processed at temperatures conducive to their ignition in the event of a system malfunction.

The materials or assemblies used in the construction of drying rooms or dry kilns located within buildings must be noncombustible, regardless of the type of construction of the building itself (see commentary, Section 703.3 for a discussion of non-combustibility criteria) where required by Chapter 4 or SBC 501. The use of noncombustible materials of construction for drying rooms and dry kilns provides for a measure of confinement of a fire occurring within and prevents the room or kiln from contributing to the fuel load exposed to an unwanted fire.

417.2 Piping clearance. Overhead heating pipes shall have a clearance of not less than 50 mm from combustible contents in the dryer.

Piped steam and hot-water indirect heating systems used in drying rooms or dry kilns can operate at temperatures of up to several hundred degrees centigrade and are considered a safe and appropriate method of providing heat to the drying processes. A minimum clearance of 50 mm between hydronic piping and adjacent combustible contents in the drying room or dry kilns is required to reduce the likelihood of contact ignition of the combustible contents. Though hydronic piping is frequently installed overhead, the clearance is required regardless of the pipes' location within the drying room or kiln.

417.3 Insulation. Where the operating temperature of the dryer is  \( 80^{\circ} \) C or more, metal enclosures shall be insulated from adjacent combustible materials by not less than 300 mm of airspace, or the metal walls shall be lined with 6.5 mm insulating mill board or other approved equivalent insulation.

The insulation of metal drying room and kiln enclosures from adjacent combustible materials is required where the drying apparatus operates at or above  \( 80^{\circ} \) C. Insulation can be accomplished by the use of airspace or by lining the metal dryer walls with insulating material. The insulation will reduce insulating material. The insulation will reduce the possibility that combustible materials in proximity to the drying room or dry kiln will be ignited by heat transfer from it. The temperature of  \( 80^{\circ} \) C has been determined to be the highest allowable temperature without any clearance to combustibles.

417.4 Fire protection. Drying rooms designed for high-hazard materials and processes, including special occupancies as provided for in Chapter 4, shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system complying with the provisions of Chapter 9.

The possibility of ignition increases in a drying room utilized in conjunction with hazardous materials, such as combustible fibers and other finely divided materials. The installation of an approved fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Chapter 9 will contain a fire within the drying room until the fire department (or industrial fire brigade) arrives. In sprinkled buildings, fire suppression can be easily and economically provided by installing sprinklers within the drying room or area. Wet pipe, precaution or deluge systems should be used so that water is placed on the fire in the shortest possible time. Note that dryers used in conjunction with plywood, veneer and composite board mill operations are required by SBC 801 to be protected by an approved deluge water-spray system. See the commentary to Chapter 28 of SBC 801 for further information on lumber and woodworking facilities. In nonsprinklered or partially sprinkled buildings, the system protecting the drying room may be an approved, limited area sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.8. An alternative fire-extinguishing system consisting of dry chemical, carbon dioxide, clean agent or other approved non-water-based fire extinguishing system in accordance with Section 904 can provide an equivalent level of protection, depending on the nature of the drying room contents. See the commentary to Section 904 for a discussion of the various alternative fire-extinguishing systems available.

===== Page 0377 =====
## SECTION 418 ORGANIC COATINGS

The manufacture of organic coatings encompasses operations that produce decorative and protective coatings for architectural uses, industrial products and other specialized purposes. Requirements of this chapter address the hazards associated with the manufacture of solvent-based organic coatings. Water-based materials are exempt from these requirements. These provisions are consistent with Chapter 29 of SBC 801, which contains more detailed requirements for the manufacture of organic coatings. NFPA 35 also provides additional guidance on the maintenance of facilities utilized for the manufacture of organic coatings.

418.1 Building features. Manufacturing of organic coatings shall be done only in buildings that do not have pits or basements.

Basements, pits and depressed first-floor construction are prohibited because of the tendency for hazardous material vapors to accumulate in low areas and the difficulty in fighting fires in basements and pits in such occupancies.

418.2 Location. Organic coating manufacturing operations and operations incidental to or connected therewith shall not be located in buildings having other occupancies.

Operations and activities closely related to the primary occupancy are necessary for the efficient, continuous and safe performance of the manufacture of organic coatings. Administration, storage, shipping and receiving, as well as other related but not indispensable operations, should be located in separate buildings.

418.3 Process mills. Mills operating with close clearances and that process flammable and heat-sensitive materials, such as nitrocellulose, shall be located in a detached building or noncombustible structure.

Milling of heat-sensitive materials, such as nitrocellulose, is an extraordinary hazard. Such operations must be located in separate, single-purpose buildings away from other uses and high-hazard operations. Pebble mills pose a special vapor ignition hazard caused by static electricity. Both the grinding material and inner lining of these mills are made of materials with good insulating characteristics. Because static electricity is produced during milling, it has nowhere to go. Generally, the inside of this type of mill is either partially or totally inserted using nitrogen or carbon dioxide gas to prevent ignition.

418.4 Tank storage. Storage areas for flammable and combustible liquid tanks inside of structures shall be located at or above grade and shall be separated from the processing area by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Tank storage located below grade is prohibited. Basements located under grade-level storage areas should be discouraged. Below-grade flammable liquid fires are extremely difficult to fight. Similarly, above-grade spills will flow to lower floors, possibly resulting in spill fires on more than one building level. Tank storage of raw materials must be confined to locations at or above grade level. Tank storage rooms must be separated from processing and other storage areas by fire barriers and horizontal assemblies that are not less than 2-hour fire-resistance rated. Where possible, these rooms should be able to be accessed on at least one side from the outside. Cutoff rooms with access from two or even three sides are considered ideal.

418.5 Nitrocellulose storage. Nitrocellulose storage shall be located on a detached pad or in a separate structure or a room enclosed with not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Once ignited, nitrocellulose will continue to burn even in the absence of oxygen. Extra precautions must be used to prevent ignition and fire spread. Therefore, nitrocellulose storage should be in either a separate detached structure, on a detached exterior pad or fully enclosed by a construction of minimum 2-hour fire-resistance rating complying with fire barrier and horizontal assembly requirements.

418.6 Finished products. Storage rooms for finished products that are flammable or combustible liquids shall be separated from the processing area by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

Finished products, which are also classified as flammable or combustible liquids, must also comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 57 of SBC 801 and NFPA 30. As a minimum, a 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction consisting of horizontal assemblies and fire barriers with approved opening protectives is required between the processing area and the storage area to eliminate mutual involvement in a single fire scenario. A higher degree of fire separation may be required depending on the building's occupancy classification.

===== Page 0378 =====
## SECTION 419 ARTIFICIAL DECORATIVE VEGETATION

419.1 Artificial decorative vegetation. Artificial decorative vegetation exceeding 1.8 m in height and permanently installed outdoors within 1.5 m of a building, or on the roof of a building, shall comply with Section 321.1 of SBC 801.

Exception: Artificial decorative vegetation located more than 9 m from the exterior wall of a building.

The Section recognizes the hazards associated with increased use of decorative artificial vegetation on occupied roofs, within interior courts in buildings, and in outdoor occupancies. In the event that plastics in the decorative vegetation ignites, the fire can spread to surrounding buildings. Occupied roofs typically are classified as Group A-2 or A-3 occupancies and outdoor stadiums are classified as Group A-5, both of which accommodate large numbers of people. Additionally, when artificial vegetation is placed in close proximity to a building, a fire from such building could spread to the vegetation.

The artificial vegetation is required to comply with Section 321 of SBC 801. Section 321 essentially links to Chapter 8 of SBC 801 for testing in accordance with NFPA 701 and protection from ignition sources such as open flames and unlisted electrical lights.

## SECTION 420 GROUPS I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 AND R-4

420.1 General. Occupancies in Groups I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 shall comply with the provisions of Sections 420.1 through 420.5 and other applicable provisions of this code.

The nature of occupancies in Groups I-1 and R-1 through R-4 is such that some level of protection against fire is needed for occupants in dwelling units and sleeping units. There remains a high frequency of fires where people live. These occupancies need to be provided automatic sprinkler system protection to minimize fire- and smoke-related injuries and fatalities. Requiring a minimum fire resistance to the construction separating both units and residential areas from nonresidential areas provides an extra level of protection in people's homes from occurrences in their neighbors' homes. These separations are required between live/work units as provided in Section 508.5, but separations within each live/work unit between residential and nonresidential uses are not required.

420.2 Separation walls. Walls separating dwelling units in the same building, walls separating sleeping units in the same building and walls separating dwelling or sleeping units from other occupancies contiguous to them in the same building shall be constructed as fire partitions in accordance with Section 708.

The sleeping units or dwelling units that are in a single building are required to be separated by fire partitions complying with Section 708, or horizontal fire resistance-rated assemblies complying with Section 711. Fire partitions are the least robust of all fire-resistance-rated walls called out in the code. These occupancies all require smoke alarms in the sleeping areas of the units, and occupancies in Groups I-1 and R-1 also require general fire alarms. In addition, these occupancies are all required to be protected with an automatic sprinkler system. The reason for the nominal fire-resistant separation is to account for the fact that individuals asleep in these units could respond more slowly to a fire; therefore, some amount of fire resistance is deemed necessary to protect these occupants from each other.

Section 708.3 requires fire partitions to be not less than 1-hour fire-resistance rated. If the building's sprinkler protection is provided by a system complying with NFPA 13, the rating can be reduced to 30 minutes. Section 708.4 requires 1-hour-rated fire partitions to be supported by construction that has the same rating or better; however, this requirement is waived for these separation walls in buildings of Type II B, IIIB and VB construction.

This requirement also applies to walls that separate these Group R and I occupancies from other occupancies in the building. Even where those other areas are regulated under the accessory occupancies or Nonseparated occupancies option of mixed occupancies contained in Sections 508.2 or 508.3 respectively, these partitions and horizontal assemblies are still required.

420.3 Horizontal separation. Floor assemblies separating dwelling units in the same buildings, floor assemblies separating sleeping units in the same building and floor assemblies separating dwelling or sleeping units from other occupancies contiguous to them in the same building shall be constructed as horizontal assemblies in accordance with Section 711.

See the commentary to Section 420.2. Section 711.2 requires floor assemblies providing this separation to be not less than 1-hour fire-resistance rated. Where the building's sprinkler protection is provided by a system complying with NFPA 13, the rating can be reduced to 30 minutes. Section 708.4 requires 1-hour-rated fire partitions to be supported by construction that has the same rating or better; however, this requirement is waived for these floor

===== Page 0379 =====
assemblies in buildings of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction.

420.4 Automatic sprinkler system. Group R occupancies shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.8. Group I-1 occupancies shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6. Quick response or residential automatic sprinklers shall be installed in accordance with Section 903.3.2.

The provisions requiring automatic sprinkler protection for all buildings containing Group I or R occupancies are referenced here. In addition, reference is made to Section 903.3.2 regarding the required use of quick-response or residential automatic sprinklers.

420.5 Fire alarm systems and smoke alarms. Fire alarm systems and smoke alarms shall be provided in Group I-1, R-1 and R-2 occupancies in accordance with Sections 907.2.6, 907.2.8 and 907.2.9, respectively. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be provided in Groups I-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 in accordance with Section 907.2.11.

References to Sections 907.2.6, 907.2.8, 907.2.9 and 907.2.10 are a reminder of the requirements for fire alarm systems and smoke alarms in Group I-1, R-1 and R-2 occupancies. It is also noted that Section 907.2.11 sets forth the requirements for single-station and multiple-station smoke alarms.

420.6 Smoke barriers in Group I-1, Condition 2. Smoke barriers shall be provided in Group I-1, Condition 2, to subdivide every story used by persons receiving care, treatment or sleeping and to provide other stories with an occupant load of 50 or more persons, into not fewer than two smoke compartments. Such stories shall be divided into smoke compartments with an area of not more than 2000 m \( ^{2} \)  and the distance of travel from any point in a smoke compartment to a smoke barrier door shall not exceed 60 m. The smoke barrier shall be in accordance with Section 709.

Under this provision, refuge areas are only required for Group I-1, Condition 2 occupancies. They are not required for other Group I-1 occupancies or the Group R occupancies. Similar refuge areas are required for Group I-2 occupancies (Section 407) and Group I-3 occupancies (Section 408).

Group I-1, Condition 2 allows occupants that may need assistance with evacuation (see Section 308.2.2). Smoke barriers and the associated compartmentalization is a key protective feature utilized for this occupant type. Requirements mostly match Group I-2 smoke barrier criteria provided in Section 407 with the following noted differences: The refuge area is 1.4 m² for each care recipient in a Group I-1, Condition 2 versus the 2.8 m² required in Group I-2. There are no bed or stretcher occupants in Group I-1, Condition 2, meaning occupants can be moved during emergencies without having to be moved in a bed. The Group I-1, Condition 2 areas permitted to be included in the calculation do not include sleeping areas (sleeping room) as permitted in Group I-2. Sleeping areas are included in Group I-2 because of defend-in-place strategies during emergencies. Group I-1, Condition 2 occupants utilize smoke compartments for a staged evacuation in accordance with SBC 801 but are not supposed to stay in their rooms during emergencies.

420.6.1 Refuge area. Refuge areas shall be provided within each smoke compartment. The size of the refuge area shall accommodate the occupants and care recipients from the adjoining smoke compartment. Where a smoke compartment is adjoined by two or more smoke compartments, the minimum area of the refuge area shall accommodate the largest occupant load of the adjoining compartments. The size of the refuge area shall provide the following:

1 Not less than 1.4 m² for each care recipient.

2 Not less than 0.56 m² for other occupants.

Areas or spaces permitted to be included in the calculation of the refuge area are corridors, lounge or dining areas and other low-hazard areas.

See the commentary to Section 420.6.

420.7 Group I-1 assisted living housing units In Group I-1 occupancies, where a fire-resistance corridor is provided in areas where assisted living residents are housed, shared living spaces, group meeting or multipurpose therapeutic spaces open to the corridor shall be in accordance with all of the following criteria:

1 The walls and ceilings of the space are constructed as required for corridors.

2 The spaces are not occupied as resident sleeping rooms, treatment rooms, incidental uses in accordance with Section 509, or hazardous uses.

3 The open space is protected by an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907.

4 In Group I-1, Condition 1, the corridors onto which the spaces open are protected by an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907, or the spaces are equipped throughout with quick response sprinklers in accordance with Section 903.3.2.

===== Page 0380 =====
5 In Group I-1, Condition 2, the corridors onto which the spaces open, in the same smoke compartment, are protected by an automatic fire detection system installed in accordance with Section 907, or the smoke compartment in which the spaces are located is equipped throughout with quick-response sprinklers in accordance with Section 903.3.2.

6 The space is arranged so as not to obstruct access to the required exits.

This Section allows spaces open to corridors similar to what Group I-2 in Section 407.2 allows, while also incorporating similar safeguards. The code does not require that corridors be provided in most occupancies, including Group I-1. Once corridors are provided, however, they are required to meet the provisions of the code. Incorporating intervening rooms and/or aisles is also another option for providing compliant exit access means of egress within Group I-1. For example, this can occur in assisted living memory care facilities where sleeping units open directly into dining, multipurpose, and therapy/activity rooms.

It is often desirable to have the shared living, group meeting, multipurpose, and therapeutic areas in assisted living and assisted living memory care facilities open to exit access corridors. The list is intended to note generic spaces, not specific rooms or spaces. Typical shared living areas can include dining, TV, activity, and family rooms or similar spaces. This can create a more residential, homelike environment that can enhance the socialization of the resident care recipients. The code recognizes this and considers the potential care level needed and the 24-hour staffing while requiring enhanced protective safeguards in these areas. The code permits these areas to be open to corridors by including compensating protection features (e.g., sprinklers, arrangement, corridor construction, automatic fire detection and quick-response sprinklers).

420.8 Group I-1 cooking facilities. In Group I-1 occupancies, rooms or spaces that contain a cooking facility with domestic cooking appliances shall be permitted to be open to the corridor where all of the following criteria are met:

1 In Group I-1, Condition 1 occupancies, the number of care recipients served by one cooking facility shall not be greater than 30.

2 In Group I-1, Condition 2 occupancies, the number of care recipients served by one cooking facility and within the same smoke compartment shall not be greater than 30.
3 The space containing the cooking facilities shall be arranged so as not to obstruct access to the required exit.

4 The cooking appliances shall comply with Section 420.9.

This section allows smaller cooking spaces in more open spaces similar to what Group I-2 in Section 407.2 allows, while also incorporating similar safeguards. See also the commentary to Section 407.2.6 for further description of resident preferences and outcomes for open kitchens.

Providing smaller controlled open kitchen areas in facilities like assisted living and assisted living memory care facilities also relates to the commentary to Section 420.7 for preferred homelike residential design. The code recognizes these preferences and considers the care recipient relative care level, and the 24-hour basis care staffing, while requiring enhanced protective safeguards in these smaller kitchen areas. The code permits these open kitchen areas by including compensating protection features (e.g., sprinklers, size limits, arrangement, limitation of types of appliances, shutoff and timer controls, and extinguishing requirements).

420.9 Domestic cooking appliances. In Group I-1 occupancies, installation of cooking appliance used in domestic cooking facilities shall comply with all of the following:

1 The types of cooking appliances permitted shall be limited to ovens, cooktops, ranges, warmers and microwaves.

2 Domestic cooking hoods installed and constructed in accordance with Section 505 of SBC 501 shall be provided over cooktops or ranges.

3 Cooktops and ranges shall be protected in accordance with Section 904.14.

4 A shutoff for the fuel and electrical supply to the cooking equipment shall be provided in a location to which only staff has access.

5 A timer shall be provided that automatically deactivates the cooking appliances within a period of not more than 120 minutes.

6 A portable fire extinguisher shall be provided. Installation shall be in accordance with Section 906 and the extinguisher shall be located within a 9 m distance of travel from each domestic cooking appliance.

Exceptions:

1. Cooking facilities provided within care recipients' individual dwelling units are not required to comply with this Section.

2. Cooktops and ranges used for care-recipient training or nutritional counseling

===== Page 0381 =====
are not required to comply with Item 3 of this Section.

When cooking for a maximum of 30 care recipients in each cooking facility (as described in Section 420.8), the combination of these safety measures and standard safety aspects of Group I-1 occupancies such as sprinklers, trained staff and rated corridor walls helps reduce the level of risk to an acceptable level while providing a real social and emotional benefit to care recipients.

The appliances that are permitted to be in a Group I-1 cooking facility are electric or gas ranges, cooktops, stoves, ovens, warmers and microwaves. Toasters and toaster ovens fall into the warmer or oven category. Deep-fat fryers, charcoal grills, wood-burning ovens or commercial cooking appliances are not permitted in domestic cooking facilities. Only the cooktops and ranges are required to have a domestic cooking hood.

Section 904.14 requires either a fire-extinguishing system, listed and labeled to UL 300A, to be built into the range hood or a listed sensor in the burner to initiate shutoff upon high-heat detection, thereby preventing ignition of a cooking fire. The built-in fire extinguishing system in the hood also provides for a manual actuation of the extinguishers and an interlock that shuts down the power or fuel source to the appliance upon actuation of the extinguisher heads.

The cooktop or range must have a shutoff switch that deactivates the appliance and is accessible only to staff. This may be a switch inside a locked cabinet, a keyed switch or an electronic switch with pass code or similar security. It may be located on the wall near the appliance, in a kitchen cabinet or inside the pantry or other room. The intent is that the cooktop or range is only able to be used when staff are aware that it is being used or if staff is able to supervise. Similarly, a timer is required to deactivate the cooktop, range or oven after 120 minutes in case a staff member was distracted by, or tending to, an urgent care situation. The timer should be able to be reset by the staff member, as needed, when cooking something that requires a cooking time of longer than 120 minutes.

A portable fire extinguisher must be located within 9 m of each cooking appliance. The intent is that a staff member can quickly reach it in the event of an emergency. Ideally, it would be located in the same room as the cooking appliance but can be located outside the room as long as the travel distance does not exceed 9 m. It is best practice that this be a Class K fire extinguisher.
Exception 1: While the Section deals with a shared kitchen facility, some assisted living facilities will have kitchens within individual suites. These would be addressed the same as a standard dwelling-unit kitchen.

Exception 2: Cooktops and ranges are often used for occupational therapy where staff is helping care recipients learn how to safely cook for themselves. Staff also teach care recipients how to make healthier meals to address conditions such as heart disease or diabetes. In this instance, safeguards such as shutoff switches and fire extinguishers are prudent, but the upgraded hood is not needed. The space containing these cooktops and ranges would still need to comply with SBC 501 for ventilation.

420.10 Group R cooking facilities. In Group R occupancies, cooking appliances used for domestic cooking operations shall be in accordance with Section 917.2 of SBC 501.

With Sections 420.7 and 420.8 addressing cooking facilities in Group I occupancies, this section addresses the balance of the occupancies covered by Section 420 the Group R occupancies. This section provides direction to SBC 501 provisions regarding domestic cooking. The intent is for all Group R occupancies, including dwelling units, hotel rooms, assisted living suites, lodging houses and congregate residences, to be allowed to use the provisions in SBC 501 for domestic cooking appliances. If the hotel or dormitory has a central restaurant or cafeteria, this section would not be applicable because it would be commercial cooking. See Section 420.11 for cooking facilities in dormitories.

420.11 Group R-2 dormitory cooking facilities. Domestic cooking appliances for use by residents of Group R-2 college dormitories shall be in accordance with Sections 420.11.1 and 420.11.2.

This section provides basic requirements for the building official to follow in approving such cooking appliance installations. Item 2 of Section 420.11.1 allows cooking appliances in approved locations. Such approval is a function of the building official. The intent of the section is to allow such installations, not to prohibit them. The following sections address the use of domestic cooking appliances in both common areas and sleeping rooms on college dormitories. It does not cover resident dwelling units on college campuses that are not classified as dormitories. The provisions are similar to those that allow cooking in Group I-2 facilities in Section 407.2. See also Section 420.11.2.

420.11.1 Cooking appliances. Where located in Group R-2 college dormitories, domestic

===== Page 0382 =====
cooking appliances for use by residents shall be in compliance with all of the following:

1 The types of domestic cooking appliances shall be limited to ovens, cooktops, ranges, warmers, coffee makers and microwaves.

2 Domestic cooking appliances shall be limited to approved locations.

3 Cooktops and ranges shall be protected in accordance with Section 904.14.

4 Cooktops and ranges shall be provided with a domestic cooking hood installed and constructed in accordance with Section 505 of SBC 501.

See the commentaries to Sections 420.11 and 420.11.2.

420.11.2 Cooking appliances in sleeping rooms. Cooktops, ranges and ovens shall not be installed or used in sleeping rooms.

This section prohibits ovens, cooktops and ranges from being used in sleeping rooms. This reflects the fact that cooktops and ranges are leading causes of fires in residential settings. This section does allow the use of other cooking appliances, such as microwaves and coffee makers, in sleeping rooms. However, individual colleges may have more restrictive rules that prohibit some of these appliances from being used in their dormitories.

## SECTION 421 HYDROGEN FUEL GAS ROOMS

421.1 General. Where required by SBC 801, hydrogen fuel gas rooms shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 421.1 through 421.7.

This section is simply stating that all hydrogen cutoff rooms are to be constructed in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 421. Hydrogen fuel gas rooms were created to address the increasing and emerging concepts of fuel cells that use hydrogen and sometimes generate hydrogen on-site to run the fuel cells. The provisions of this Section are coordinated with Section 5808 of SBC 801. See also Section 406 and Section 2309 of SBC 801 for requirements where hydrogen fuel is dispensed.

421.2 Location. Hydrogen fuel gas rooms shall not be located below grade.

Restrictions against installation of hydrogen fuel gas rooms below grade are similar to those restricting the location of flammable and combustible liquids in basements. Explosion hazards are the primary concern, and placement of materials that have an ability to cause an explosion in below-grade spaces is not appropriate. Such spaces are more difficult to evacuate, create a fire explosion hazard to the structure above and are very difficult for the fire department to address.

421.3 Design and construction. Hydrogen fuel gas rooms not classified as Group H shall be separated from other areas of the building in accordance with Section 509.1.

Hydrogen fuel gas rooms are required to be separated by not less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated fire barriers and horizontal assemblies, which is consistent with the requirements in Table 509.1 for incidental uses. In addition, the classification of the space will affect the separation requirements. Hydrogen fuel gas rooms can contain any amount of hydrogen, but where the maximum allowable quantities are exceeded, the room can no longer be considered an incidental use and instead must be classified as a Group H-2 occupancy. A Group H-2 must then be addressed as a separated occupancy. In all cases, separation in accordance with Table 508.4 would apply in addition to the applicable occupancy-specific requirements.

421.3.1 Pressure control. Hydrogen fuel gas rooms shall be provided with a ventilation system designed to maintain the room at a negative pressure in relation to surrounding rooms and spaces.

This section requires hydrogen fuel gas rooms to be maintained at a negative pressure with regard to surrounding spaces to provide some level of protection against a flammable mixture being attained in other parts of the building.

421.3.2 Windows. Operable windows in interior walls shall not be permitted. Fixed windows shall be permitted where in accordance with Section 716.

Operable windows are prohibited to further reduce the likelihood of allowing hydrogen from escaping into the room and entering other portions of the building that may not be properly ventilated. An operable window could inadvertently be left in the open or partially open position and go unnoticed. Fixed window openings must meet the requirements of Section 716 to ensure that the requirements for opening protectives are met. More specifically, the proper fire protection ratings for openings in fire barriers are required.

421.4 Exhaust ventilation. Hydrogen fuel gas rooms shall be provided with mechanical exhaust ventilation in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 502.16.1 of SBC 501.

The purpose of this section is to prevent a dangerous accumulation of flammable gas in the room through the use of an exhaust ventilation system. The Sourcebook for Hydrogen Applications recommends ventilation at the rate of 5.08 liters per second per square meters of floor area, which is

===== Page 0383 =====
consistent with the requirements in Chapter 5 of SBC 501.

421.5 Gas detection system. Hydrogen fuel gas rooms shall be provided with a gas detection system that complies with Sections 421.5.1, 421.5.2, and 916.

Some gases contain additives that produce pungent odors for easy recognition. Systems using non-odorized gases, such as hydrogen and liquid natural gas, must utilize gas detection systems to detect leaks. This section specifically requires such detection due to the hazards associated with a buildup of hydrogen at hazardous levels within a building.

421.5.1 System design. Activation of a gas detection alarm shall result in both of the following:

1 Initiation of distinct audible and visible alarm signals both inside and outside of the hydrogen fuel gas room.

2 Automatic activation of the mechanical exhaust ventilation system.

The detection system must initiate the operations specified in Section 916 at any time that the flammable gas concentration exceeds one-fourth of the concentration necessary to support combustion. Early detection of the presence of a flammable gas will allow adequate mitigation procedures to be taken. Hydrogen fires are not normally extinguished until the supply of hydrogen has been shut off because of the danger of reignition or explosion. A gas detection system in the room or space housing a gaseous hydrogen system results in early notification of a leak that is occurring before the escaping gas reaches a hazardous concentration.

421.5.2 Failure of the gas detection system. Failure of the gas detection system shall automatically activate the mechanical exhaust ventilation system, stop hydrogen generation, and cause a trouble signal to sound at an approved location.

Systems must be designed to be self-monitoring and fail-safe in that all safety systems are activated to alert any occupants that a problem exists and to prevent more hydrogen from being generated by any appliances in the room where hazardous conditions cannot be monitored.

421.6 Explosion control. Explosion control shall be provided where required by Section 414.5.1.

The requirements of this Section are intended to address the circumstance resulting from a catastrophic failure of the cutoff room. These requirements are the final safeguard in case safety features such as interlocked doors, ventilation systems and gas detection systems should fail. An ignited hydrogen mixture produces large quantities of heat, causing a rapid expansion of the surrounding air. This can cause a pressure increase in a confined space and a catastrophic failure. Explosion control methods are identified in Section 911 of SBC 801 to prevent such a catastrophic failure. The explosion control requirements for hydrogen are consistent with the requirements in NFPA 55 and the Sourcebook for Hydrogen Applications.

421.7 Standby power. Mechanical ventilation and gas detection systems shall be provided with a standby power system in accordance with Section 2702.

The ventilation system and gas detection system are life safety systems and, therefore, must be dependable. Both safety systems must remain active in the event of a power failure of the primary power supply. Hydrogen is a colorless, odorless gas; a release might go undetected if detection systems are not functioning. The accumulation of hydrogen in an unventilated area can lead to mixtures in the flammable range if safety systems and mechanical ventilation systems are not in operation. Chapter 50 of SBC 801 addresses emergency and standby power requirements for emergency systems. It also allows an exception to the requirement for systems that are fail-safe (see SBC 801 Section 5004.7.2). This exception may be used in cutoff rooms where hydrogen is generated, but not stored. Any storage of hydrogen within the cutoff room would not qualify for the exception because, in the event of a power failure, there will be no way to detect or ventilate a release from a storage vessel.

## SECTION 422 AMBULATORY CARE FACILITIES

422.1 General. Occupancies classified as ambulatory care facilities shall comply with the provisions of Sections 422.1 through 422.7 and other applicable provisions of this code.

Complex outpatient surgeries outside of the hospital are now commonplace. They are performed in facilities often called "day surgery centers" or "ambulatory surgical centers" because care recipients are able to walk in and walk out the same day. Procedures render care recipients temporarily incapable of self-preservation by application of nerve blocks, sedation or anesthesia. Care recipients in these facilities typically recover quickly. A definition of "Ambulatory care facility" is provided in Section 202.

The code identifies medical care Group I occupancies as having 24-hour stay. Without a 24-hour stay, these surgery centers are classified as Group B. Strictly regulating such

===== Page 0384 =====
occupancies as a typical Group B occupancy is considered inappropriate, as this would allow the rendering of an unlimited number of people incapable of self-preservation with no more protection than a business office. These types of facilities contain distinctly different hazards to life and safety than other business occupancies, such as:

Care recipients incapable of self-preservation require rescue by other occupants or fire personnel.

2 Medical staff must stabilize the patient prior to evacuation; therefore, staff may require evacuation as well.

3 Use of oxidizing medical gases, such as oxygen and nitrous oxide.

4 Prevalence of surgical fires.
These requirements provide a scaled approach to protection. The occupancy classification is a Group B, but with some enhanced safety features focused on the concern with occupants being incapable of self-preservation on a temporary basis. The enhanced requirements are based on the concepts in the regulation of the Group I-2 occupancy requirements found in Section 407.

422.2 Separation. Ambulatory care facilities where the potential for four or more care recipients are to be incapable of self-preservation at any time, shall be separated from adjacent spaces, corridors or tenants with a fire partition installed in accordance with Section 708.

In a multi-tent or mixed occupancy building where there are other uses present in addition to an ambulatory care facility, a degree of fire separation between the ambulatory care facility and those nonrelated spaces is required where the ambulatory care facility is intended to have at least four care recipients incapable of self-preservation at any one time. The minimum separation, a fire partition complying with Section 708, is viewed as an important tool in isolating the ambulatory care portion of building from fire hazards that may occur in other portions of the building. Where a building is considered wholly as an ambulatory care facility, or where the ambulatory care facility occupies the entire story of a multistory building, there is no requirement for a fire partition to be constructed. (See separation example in Commentary Figure 422.2).

422.3 Smoke compartments. Where the aggregate area of one or more ambulatory care facilities is greater than 900 m \( ^{2} \)  on one story, the story shall be provided with a smoke barrier to subdivide the story into not fewer than two smoke compartments. The area of any one such smoke compartment shall be not greater than 2000 m \( ^{2} \) . The distance of travel from any point in a smoke compartment to a smoke barrier door shall be not greater than 60 m. The smoke barrier shall be installed in accordance with Section 709 with the exception that smoke barriers shall be continuous from outside wall to an outside wall, a floor to a floor, or from a smoke barrier to a smoke barrier or a combination thereof.

In larger facilities, the creation of smoke compartments is required to allow a protect-in-place environment. These compartments allow staff a safer environment to stabilize the care recipients before evacuation, and protection for fire personnel who may have to evacuate both care recipients and staff. The maximum size of a smoke compartment is limited to 2000 m², consistent with the maximum size allowed for Group I-2, Condition 1 occupancies. It is important to note that each floor must be divided into at least two smoke compartments where the total floor area exceeds 900 m² on each story. Conversely, smoke compartments are not required for ambulatory care facilities with a floor area that does not exceed 900 m² on each story. The 900 m² threshold is based on a story-by-story basis and is based on the aggregate floor areas where multiple ambulatory care facilities are present. The travel distance of 60 m to a door providing egress from the smoke compartment is the same requirement as for Group I-2 occupancies [see smoke compartment examples in Commentary Figures 422.3(1) and 422.3(2)].

422.3.1 Means of egress. Where ambulatory care facilities require smoke compartmentation in accordance with Section 422.3, the fire safety evacuation plans provided in accordance with Section 1002.2 shall identify the building components necessary to support a defend-in-place emergency response in accordance with Sections 404 and 408 of SBC 801.

Defend-in-place, or protect in place, is a concept that has long been employed as the preferred method of fire response in hospitals due to the fragile nature of the occupants. Occupants in this setting, and similarly in ambulatory care facilities, are often dependent on the building infrastructure given that immediate evacuation would place their lives at risk. This infrastructure typically includes life support systems such as medical gases, emergency power and environmental controls that rely on continued building operation. Previous versions of this code have created a tried and tested set of requirements to support this concept, such as smoke compartmentation and areas of refuge. However, previous codes have not specifically described the concept of occupants remaining within a building during a

===== Page 0385 =====
fire emergency, leading to confusion and misapplication during design and enforcement. The concept is predicated on the use of smoke compartmentation.

422.3.2 Refuge area. Not less than 2.8 m \( ^{2} \)  for each non-ambulatory care recipient shall be provided within the aggregate area of corridors, care recipient rooms, treatment rooms, lounge or dining areas and other low-hazard areas within each smoke compartment. Each occupant of an ambulatory care facility shall be provided with access to a refuge area without passing through or utilizing adjacent tenant spaces.

This requirement is very similar to that found in Section 407.5.1 for Group I-2 occupancies. The purpose is to provide adequate space for care recipients, on beds, who might be relocated to an adjacent smoke compartment. Since the facility may still be in operation during the fire, space must be provided in corridors, patient rooms, treatment rooms, lounge or dining areas and other low-hazard areas for both the care recipients being relocated and the care recipients being treated in that smoke compartment. Section 407.5.1 acknowledges that there may be floors that do not house care recipients who are confined to beds or litters. It is also important that access to a refuge area be provided without requiring the occupant to travel through any other tenant space.

422.3.3 Independent egress. A means of egress shall be provided from each smoke compartment created by smoke barriers without having to return through the smoke compartment from which means of egress originated.

This Section is conceptually linked to Section 407.5.4 and requires that occupants should be able to exit the building without having to reenter a smoke compartment from where they started. Although the strategy is to protect in place, occupants should not have to travel back through a smoke compartment to ultimately exit the building. This prevents the creation of a dead-end smoke compartment [see Commentary Figures 407.5, 407.5.4(1) and 407.5.4(2)].

422.4 Automatic sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided for ambulatory care facilities in accordance with Section 903.2.2.

Section 422.4 is part of the package of enhanced Group B requirements to accommodate the risk to occupants that is higher than the typical business occupancy but does not warrant classification as a Group I-2 occupancy. The actual sprinkler requirements are located in Section 903.2.2. The specific requirements apply where there are four or more care recipients incapable of self-preservation or where one or more care recipients are located on a story other than the level of exit discharge. The entire floor area meeting either one of the criteria must be sprinkled. Note also that where the ambulatory care facility is on other than the level of exit discharge, the floors below such floor containing the ambulatory care facility must also be provided with automatic sprinklers.

422.5 Fire alarm systems. A fire alarm system shall be provided for ambulatory care facilities in accordance with Section 907.2.2.

As with the sprinkler requirements, the alarm requirements are actually located in Chapter 9. More specifically, Section 907.2.2.1 requires a manual fire alarm system in any fire area containing a Group B ambulatory care facility. Further, an automatic smoke detection system is required within ambulatory care facility and public use spaces, such as lobbies and corridors, except where all areas of the building are protected by an automatic sprinkler system. Where the exception is applied, the sprinkler system is required to activate the occupant notification appliances upon sprinkler water flow (see commentary, Section 907.2.2.1). The scope of the smoke detection was purposely narrowed to limit the amount of retrofit measures that a building owner would be required to undertake where a new ambulatory care tenant was established in an existing building.

422.6 Electrical systems. In ambulatory care facilities, the essential electrical system for electrical components, equipment and systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 27 and NFPA 99.

NFPA 99: Health Care Facilities Code provides an assessment tool for determining what constitutes essential electrical systems. It provides a risk-based approach to determine the need for an essential electrical system, what class system is required and general design requirements for each type of system.

422.7 Domestic cooking. Installation of cooking appliances used in domestic cooking facilities shall comply with all of the following:

1 The types of cooking appliances permitted are limited to ovens, cooktops, ranges, warmers and microwaves.

2 Domestic cooking hoods installed and constructed in accordance with Section 505 of SBC 501 shall be provided over cooktops or ranges.

3 A shutoff for the fuel and electrical supply to the cooking equipment shall be provided in a location to which only staff has access.

===== Page 0386 =====
4 A timer shall be provided that automatically deactivates the cooking appliances within a period of not more than 120 minutes.

5 A portable fire extinguisher shall be provided. Installation shall be in accordance with Section 906 and the extinguisher shall be located within a 9 m distance of travel from each domestic cooking appliance.

In an ambulatory cafe facility, kitchens may be provided as part of nutrition counseling or care recipient training/rehabilitation facilities. See also the commentary to Section 407.2.6.

The appliances that are permitted to be in a domestic cooking facility are electric or gas ranges, cooktops, stoves, ovens, warmers and microwaves. Toasters and toaster ovens fall into the warmer or oven category. Deep-fat fryers, charcoal grills, wood-burning ovens or commercial cooking appliances are not permitted in domestic cooking facilities. Only the cooktops and ranges are required to have a domestic cooking hood.

The cooktop or range must have a shutoff switch that deactivates the appliance and is accessible only to staff. This may be a switch inside a locked cabinet, a keyed switch or an electronic switch with pass code or similar security. It may be located on the wall near the appliance, in a kitchen cabinet or inside the pantry or other room. The intent is that the cooktop or range is only able to be used when staff are aware that it is being used or if staff is able to supervise. Similarly, a timer is required to deactivate the cooktop, range or oven after 120 minutes in case a staff member was distracted by, or tending to, an urgent care situation. The timer should be able to be reset by the staff member, as needed, when cooking something that requires a cooking time of longer than 120 minutes.

A portable fire extinguisher must be located within 9 m of each cooking appliance. The intent is that a staff member can quickly reach it in the event of an emergency. Ideally, it would be located in the same room as the cooking appliance but can be located outside the room as long as the travel distance does not exceed 9 m. It is best practice that this a Class K fire extinguisher.

## SECTION 423 STORM SHELTERS

423.1 General. This Section applies to the construction of storm shelters constructed as separate detached buildings or constructed as rooms or spaces within buildings for the purpose of providing protection from storms that produce high winds, such as tornadoes and hurricanes, during the storm. This Section specifies where storm shelters are required and provides requirements for the design and construction of storm shelters. Design of facilities for use as emergency shelters after the storm are outside the scope of ICC 500 and shall comply with Table 1604.5 as a Risk Category IV Structure.

Post-tornado investigations have determined that general SBC 201-compliant facilities are susceptible to significant building damage (both structural and cladding) if struck by strong or violent tornadoes. While the damage may not result in a total structural failure, it can cause loss of life and injuries. The purpose of the storm shelter is to provide life-safety protection for people during tornadoes or hurricanes.

The standard does not address the use of the shelter as a post-storm recovery facility. Storms shelters intended to also serve as post-storm recovery facilities must be designed as Risk Category IV structures in accordance with Table 1604.5, where risk categories are assigned to buildings to account for consequences of building failure. Buildings assigned higher risk categories are required to meet higher multihazard design criteria that result in greater overall resiliency. In the case of essential facilities such as post-storm recovery shelters, the Risk Category IV designation is intended to preserve essential community services, so those personnel are available after an event to assist with recovery efforts.

ICC 500-compliant storm shelters are only designed to provide protection during an extreme wind incident. Most are not sized or equipped for longer occupant duration needed for post-storm recovery facilities. ICC 500 requirements for storm shelter resistance to wind pressures and windborne debris far exceed the wind design criteria required for Risk Category IV structures. Because storm shelters are often located within host buildings, the exception in Section 1604.5.1 allows the host building to maintain the risk category designation independent of the storm shelter unless the storm shelter is also designated to serve as poststorm recovery facility. The exception is important because additional cost required to upgrade the storm shelter host building to comply with the potentially higher Risk Category IV requirements would ultimately serve to discourage storm shelter construction. Sections 423.4 and 423.5 specify two instances where storm shelters are required in buildings constructed in compliance with the code.

423.2 Construction. Storm shelters shall be constructed in accordance with this code and ICC 500 and shall be designated as hurricane shelters, tornado shelters, or combined hurricane and tornado shelters. Buildings or structures that are

===== Page 0387 =====
also designated as emergency shelters shall also comply with Table 1604.5 as Risk Category IV structures.

Any storm shelter not required by this Section shall be permitted to be constructed, provided that such structures meet the requirements of this code and ICC 500.

ICC 500 provides requirements for the design and construction of shelters to protect people from the violent winds of hurricanes and tornadoes. The standard includes special requirements for structural design, including wind loads that are considerably higher than the wind loads required by Chapter 16 for all structures. Storm shelters are commonly also used for other purposes during normal building operation. Examples include gymnasiums, classrooms and hallways in school buildings, and locker rooms and bathrooms in a fire station. Buildings used for the sole purpose as storm shelters are common at manufactured home parks.

Residential storm shelters are defined as shelters for dwelling units and as shelters with an occupant load of 16 or fewer. Any storm shelters not meeting that definition would be considered community storm shelters, including shelter for larger groups of homes and apartment buildings, as well as other occupancies.

Wind loads for tornado and hurricane storm shelters are based on wind speed maps developed specifically for ICC 500. The wind speeds are greater than those shown in wind speed maps in Chapter 16.

The high wind speeds in tornadoes and hurricanes produce windborne debris, turning construction materials into deadly missiles. The standard contains missile criteria, impact test methods and pass-fail criteria from windborne debris penetration. The standard also addresses impact loads on the shelter roof due to lay-down hazards and falling debris hazards. Additional storm-related hazards that shelters must resist per ICC 500 include extreme rainfall, inland flooding and storm-surge flooding.

ICC 500 addresses nonstructural issues, as well. Critical support systems are required to remain functional for 24 hours for hurricane storm shelters and 2 hours for tornado storm shelters. The standard addresses minimum requirements for ventilation air, sanitation facilities, water supply, lighting and other minimal power needs.

It should be noted that the entrances and exits to community storm shelters are required to be accessible in accordance with ICC/American National Standards Institute A117.1, Accessible and Useable Buildings and Facilities. In addition, the occupant load requirements are such that minimum usable floor area will need to account for wheelchair space.

423.3 Occupancy classification. The occupancy classification for a storm shelter shall be determined in accordance with this Section.

Occupancy classifications for storm shelters were adopted from ICC 500 to provide direct access to all code users. The correlated provisions are intended to facilitate early planning for: storm shelter projects or projects where storm shelters are required in accordance with Sections 423.4 and 423.5, or where storm shelters are being considered for inclusion within a host building.

423.3.1 Dedicated storm shelters. A facility designed to be occupied solely as a storm shelter shall be classified as Group A-3 for the determination of requirements other than those covered in ICC 500.

Exceptions:

1. The occupancy category for dedicated storm shelters with an occupant load of fewer than 50 persons as determined in accordance with ICC 500 shall be in accordance with Section 303.

2. The occupancy category for a dedicated residential storm shelter shall be the Group R occupancy served.

Where a facility is provided for the sole purpose of functioning as a storm shelter, it was determined that the facility would most likely resemble a Group A-3 facility as described in SBC 201.

Exception 1 recognizes that a relaxation of wall and ceiling finish requirements in corridors, number of plumbing fixtures in restrooms and bathrooms, and slope and handrail requirements for means of egress may not be appropriate for a small shelter serving at most a few dozen people. The exception points to a provision in SBC 201 that allows a building or structure used for assembly purposes but having an occupant load less than 50 persons to be designated as a Group B occupancy rather than a Group A occupancy.

Exception 2 addresses congregate living facilities, lodging houses and custodial care facilities housed in buildings with one or two dwelling units and 16 or fewer occupants classified as Group R-3 or R-4 under SBC 201. It is intended to prevent any possible issues that might stem from having a Group B (as permitted by Exception 1) structure adjacent or accessory to a Group R building.

===== Page 0388 =====
423.3.2 Storm shelters within host buildings. Where designated storm shelters are constructed as a room or space within a host building that will normally be occupied for other purposes, the requirements of this code for the occupancy of the building, or the individual rooms or spaces thereof, shall apply unless otherwise required by ICC 500.

Frequently, storm shelters are designated rooms or spaces within larger facilities (or "host buildings") that are designed to function as storm shelters in tornadoes or hurricanes but are used for other purposes under normal circumstances. A common example is a classroom, study hall, gymnasium or cafeteria space in a school building. The purpose of adding this statement to the standard is to establish that the standard is not intended to supplant the requirements for the normal use of the space. For instance, determination of occupant load for the use of the space as a shelter does not change the occupant load of the space in its "normal" function.

423.4 Critical emergency operations. In areas where the shelter design wind speed for tornadoes in accordance with Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500 is 112 m/s, 911 call stations, emergency operation centers and fire, rescue, ambulance and police stations shall comply with Table 1604.5 as a Risk Category IV structure and shall be provided with a storm shelter constructed in accordance with ICC 500.

Critical emergency operations facilities—specifically 911 call stations; emergency operation centers; and fire, rescue, ambulance, and police stations centers—are essential for the delivery of vital services or protection of a community. Section 424.4 requires ICC 500-compliant storm shelters in critical emergency operations facilities constructed in accordance with this code and located in areas with greatest risk of strong tornadoes. Unlike the Group E occupancies addressed in Section 423.5, critical emergency operations facilities have no minimum occupancy for the application of Section 423.4.

The geographical limitation of Sections 423.4 and 423.5 are critical to applying the provisions of this code. That is, the only jurisdictions affected by Sections 423.4 and 423.5 are areas where the shelter design wind speed for tornadoes is 112 m/s as defined in Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500. Figure 304.2(1) of ICC 500. The types of facilities that are required to have shelters are locations that house emergency responders or systems that a community would want operational after a tornado event.

An option to providing a storm shelter within these buildings is to construct the entire building as a storm shelter. The advantage of constructing the whole building as a shelter is that, should a tornado hit the building, the building has a better chance of surviving the storm and therefore being ready to provide emergency services to the community immediately after the storm passes.

423.5 Group E occupancies. In areas where the shelter design wind speed for tornadoes is 110 m/s, all Group E occupancies with an aggregate occupant load of 50 or more shall have a storm shelter constructed in accordance with ICC 500.

Exceptions:

1. Group E Day care facilities.

2. Group E occupancies accessory to mosques.

3. Buildings meeting the requirements for shelter design in ICC 500.

Section 423.5 requires ICC 500-compliant storm shelters in Group E Occupancies constructed in accordance with this code and with aggregate occupancy loads of 50 or more. As with Section 423.4, the provisions of Section 423.5 apply only to buildings that are located in areas with greatest risk of strong tornadoes. The only exceptions to the storm shelter provisions of Section 423.5 are Group E Day care facilities (see Sections 305.2 and 308.6.1), Group E occupancies accessory (i.e., classrooms; see Section 305.2.1), and buildings that otherwise meet the ICC 500 requirements for shelter design.

Tornado warning times are unpredictable and often very short (the average lead time for tornado warnings is 13 minutes). It is imperative that K-12 school students be able to shelter at their schools to have life-safety protection from a tornado in a storm shelter. Section 423.5.1 specifies the size requirements of the storm shelter. There is nothing in the code that dictates that the capacity be provided in a single shelter. Having more than one shelter serve the needs of a building, or a complex of buildings, complies with the code. Some schools use the toilet rooms throughout the school as shelters to lessen the time and travel for students to access those shelters. In addition, the option exists to build the whole school as a shelter (Exception 3). Schools that include an auditorium, gymnasium, or common space where large numbers are able to gather could use these spaces as high-capacity storm shelters.

423.5.1 Required occupant capacity. The required occupant capacity of the storm shelter shall include all of the buildings on the site and shall be the greater of the following:

===== Page 0389 =====
1 The total occupant load of the classrooms, vocational rooms and offices in the Group E occupancy.

2 The occupant load of the largest indoor assembly space that is associated with the Group E occupancy.

Exceptions:

1. Where a new building is being added on an existing Group E site, and where the new building is not of sufficient size to accommodate the required occupant capacity of the storm shelter for all of the buildings on the site, the storm shelter shall at a minimum accommodate the required occupant capacity for the new building.

2. Where approved by the building official, the required occupant capacity of the shelter shall be permitted to be reduced by the occupant capacity of any existing storm shelters on the site.

With the many uses of a school building, or a complex of buildings, not all spaces will be fully occupied at the same time. Worst-case occupant load is used for fire exiting where it is assumed all spaces are occupied simultaneously. But fire exiting total occupant load for the building is excessive for storm shelter design. The determination for the required capacity of the shelter is based on the number of staff and students that will be in the school during a typical school day or the largest indoor assembly space that would be fully utilized either during or outside of school hours, whichever is greater. If there are multiple indoor assembly spaces such as gymnasium, auditorium, cafeteria and library, the space with the largest occupant load is considered for determining capacity of the shelter. Thus, rather than the total occupant load of the building, the capacity of the shelter is appropriately based on occupant load described in the two scenarios described in Items 1 and 2. These provisions are not intended to require outdoor areas on the site (e.g., sports fields and bleachers) to be considered, since those areas are not buildings.

If a new building is added to the site of an existing school, the code requires a storm shelter be included. The new building could be a separate structure on the site, or it could be an addition to an existing building that is separated from the existing building by a fire wall. A fire wall creates a separate building. If an addition is made but is not separated by a fire wall, the provisions of SBC 901 apply. Refer to ICC 500, Chapter 6 for fire safety requirements for storm shelters.
If a new building is added to an existing Group E site, this is an opportunity to provide a storm shelter for that school. The designer would be responsible for determining the required storm shelter capacity for both the new building and for the rest of the facility on the site. If the new building is not large enough to house a shelter for the required occupant capacity of the entire Group E site, the shelter is required to at least accommodate the students and staff within that new building. If the new building is large enough to include a shelter that could accommodate all the students and staff on the site, the shelter is required to do so. If there is an existing storm shelter on the site, that can be considered to reduce the capacity required for the new shelter. The code is not intended to require the new building be increased in size just to meet the shelter provisions.

423.5.2 Location. Storm shelters shall be located within the buildings they serve or shall be located where the maximum distance of travel from not fewer than one exterior door of each building to a door of the shelter serving that building does not exceed 300 m.

This section requires the shelter to be within a building or within a distance of travel of 300 m or less. Where the shelter is remote, this would be approximately a 4-minute walk at 1.3 m/s, which is an average speed that humans tend to walk. Added to the estimated walk time is an assumed few hundred meters travel distance to first reach the exit of the building being served. Combined, the total travel time is 5 minutes. This is consistent with current FEMA guidance for a maximum 5-minute walk time to reach the storm shelter.

## SECTION 424 PLAY STRUCTURES

424.1 Play structures. Play structures installed inside all occupancies covered by this code that exceed 3 m in height or 14 m² in area shall comply with Sections 424.2 through 424.5.

Play structures have been regulated for some time by the code where such structures are located within covered mall buildings. The primary concern, consistent with other structures located within a covered mall building, is the combustibility of such play structures. Due to the potential fire hazards, the regulations are now applicable where such structures are located within any building regulated by this code, regardless of occupancy classification. The current provisions are essentially identical to those that historically regulated children's play structures located within covered mall buildings. Where these structures exceed 3 m in height or 14 m² in area, the provisions of Sections 424.2 through 424.5 must be followed.

===== Page 0390 =====
424.2 Materials. Children’s play structures shall be constructed of noncombustible materials or of combustible materials that comply with the following:

1 Fire-retardant-treated wood complying with Section 2303.2.

2 Light-transmitting plastics complying with Section 2606.

3 Foam plastics (including the pipe foam used in soft contained play equipment structures) having a maximum heat-release rate not greater than 100 kilowatts when tested in accordance with UL 1975 or when tested in accordance with NFPA 289, using the 20-kW ignition source.

4 Aluminium composite material (ACM) meeting the requirements of Class A interior finish in accordance with Chapter 8 when tested as an assembly in the maximum thickness intended for use.

5 Textiles and films complying with the fire propagation performance criteria contained in Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701.

6 Plastic materials used to construct rigid components of soft-contained play equipment structures (such as tubes, windows, panels, junction boxes, pipes, slides and decks) exhibiting a peak rate of heat release not exceeding  \( 400 \, kW/m^{2} \)  when tested in accordance with ASTM E1354 at an incident heat flux of  \( 50 \, kW/m^{2} \)  in the horizontal orientation at a thickness of 6 mm.

7 Ball pool balls, used in soft-contained play equipment structures, having a maximum heat-release rate not greater than 100 kilowatts when tested in accordance with UL 1975 or when tested in accordance with NFPA 289, using the 20-kW ignition source. The minimum specimen test size shall be 900 mm by 900 mm by an average of 500 mm deep, and the balls shall be held in a box constructed of galvanized steel poultry netting wire mesh.

8 Foam plastics shall be covered by a fabric, coating or film meeting the fire propagation performance criteria contained in Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701.

9 The floor covering placed under the children’s play structure shall exhibit a Class I interior floor finish classification, as described in Section 804, when tested in accordance with ASTM E648 or NFPA 253.
10 Interior finishes for structures exceeding 56 m² in area or 3 m in height shall have a flame spread index not greater than that specified in Table 803.13 for the occupancy group and location designated. Interior wall and ceiling finish materials tested in accordance with NFPA 286 and meeting the acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.1.1, shall be permitted to be used where a Class A classification in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 is required.

The amount of combustible materials associated with play structures is rigidly limited. The provisions of Section 424.2 provide 10 limitations for combustible materials that can be used to construct play equipment. These limitations are consistent with those previously applicable only to play structures located in covered mall buildings. The materials where tested in accordance with NFPA 701 must comply with the performance criteria of one of the two identified test methods. The historic “small-scale test” is no longer accepted.

424.3 Fire protection. Play structures shall be provided with the same level of approved fire suppression and detection devices required for other structures in the same occupancy.

* Play structures within a building must be provided with fire suppression and detection devices that provide an equal or better degree of fire protection than that required for the occupancy in which the play structures are located.

424.4 Separation. Play structures shall have a horizontal separation from building walls, partitions and from elements of the means of egress of not less than 1.5 m. Playground structures shall have a horizontal separation from other play structures of not less than 6 m.

* Multiple play structures must be isolated from each other by a minimum distance of 6 m. This separation reduces the concentration of combustible materials within a single area. A minimum separation of 1.5 m is also required between any play structure and portions of the building's construction, including means of egress elements, to allow for emergency personnel access and to reduce fire spread potential.

424.5 Area limits. Play structures shall be not greater than 56 m² in area, unless a special investigation, acceptable to the building official, has demonstrated adequate fire safety.

* Play structures are limited to a 56 m² area limitation unless adequate fire safety is proven to the building official by way of a special investigation.

===== Page 0391 =====
424.5.1 Design. Play structures exceeding 55 m \( ^{2} \)  in area or 3 m in height shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 16.

In cases where play structures exceed 55 square meter or are higher than 3 m, the structure shall be subject to structural load requirements of Chapter 16 and designed according to common engineering practice.

## SECTION 425 HYPERBARIC

## FACILITIES

425.1 Hyperbaric facilities. Hyperbaric facilities shall meet the requirements contained in Chapter 14 of NFPA 99.

For these unique treatment facilities, Chapter 20 of NFPA 99 provides appropriate design criteria. While hyperbaric facilities are often located in a hospital facility (Group I-2, Condition 2), they can also be found at independent medical facilities or ambulatory care facilities.

## SECTION 426 COMBUSTIBLE DUSTS, GRAIN PROCESSING AND STORAGE

426.1 General. The provisions of Sections 426.1.1 through 426.1.7 shall apply to buildings in which materials that produce combustible dusts are stored or handled. Buildings that store or handle combustible dusts shall comply with the applicable provisions of SBC 801. Where required by the fire code official, NFPA 652 and the applicable provisions of NFPA 61, NFPA 85, NFPA 120, NFPA 484, NFPA 654, NFPA 655 and NFPA 664 shall apply.

Combustible dusts can generate high-pressure gas by combustion in air. The pressure created can destroy process equipment and structures. While there is a minimum concentration of dust required, there is no reliable upper concentration limitation beyond which combustion will not occur. The ignition source is often the process equipment itself. The provisions of this section primarily address the construction of a building that contains this hazard. The construction requirements are primarily intended to reduce the exposure hazard should a fire or explosion occur. To minimize the impact of the explosion on the structure, explosion control in accordance with Section 414.5.1 and SBC 801 is required. The provisions of this section apply to all buildings in which combustible dusts and particles are of sufficient quantity to be readily ignited and subject to explosion. The concentration that would be required to constitute such a hazard is dependent on the particle size. Additional guidance on the relative fire risk associated with various combustible dusts can be found in the referenced standards. In addition to the provisions of this section, compliance with the provisions of SBC 801 and the referenced standards is essential to minimize potential ignition and fire and explosion hazards. Chapter 22 of SBC 801 contains specific safety precautions for combustible dust-producing operations and references additional standards for explosion protection based on the type of process involved. Essentially, each of the referenced standards prescribes reasonable requirements for safety to life and property from fire and explosion. The standards also minimize the resulting damage should a fire or explosion occur. More specifically, they contain provisions for construction, ventilation, explosion venting, equipment, heating devices, dust control and fire protection; supplemental requirements related to electrical wiring and equipment; provisions concerning protection from sparks; and regulations addressing cutting and welding, smoking and signage.

426.1.1 Type of construction and height exceptions. Buildings shall be constructed in compliance with the height, number of stories and area limitations specified in Sections 504 and 506; except that where erected of Type I or II construction, the heights and areas of grain elevators and similar structures shall be unlimited, and where of Type IV construction, the maximum building height shall be 19 m and except further that, in isolated areas, the maximum building height of Type IV structures shall be increased to 25 m.

The construction of buildings in which combustible dusts can be readily ignitable and subject to an explosion hazard is restricted to the height and area limits in Table 504.3, Table 504.4 and Table 506.2 for Group H-2. The limitation on construction is intended to reduce the available fuel source that could ignite and serve as the source of a dust explosion. Grain elevators and similar structures that require a height in excess of that permitted in Table 504.3 may be of unlimited height if the structures are of Type I or II construction; or such structures may be 19 m if they are of Type IV construction. If the structure is of Type IV construction and located so as not to constitute an explosion hazard, the allowable height may be increased to 25 m. Although the buildings are required to have an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.5, the speed at which the combustion process or explosion could occur may reduce the effectiveness of the sprinkler system. Additional guidance on methods to prevent explosions can be found in Section 911 of SBC 801 and applicable referenced standards, such as NFPA 69, for explosion prevention systems.

426.1.2 Grinding rooms. Every room or space occupied for grinding or other operations that

===== Page 0392 =====
produce combustible dusts in such a manner that the room or space is classified as a Group H-2 occupancy shall be enclosed with fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. The fire-resistance rating of the enclosure shall be not less than 2 hours where the area is not more than 280 m \( ^{2} \) , and not less than 4 hours where the area is greater than 280 m \( ^{2} \) .

Grinding rooms are to be separated from remaining parts of the building by construction having a fire resistance rating of at least 2 hours, where the area of the room is greater than 280 m \( ^{2} \) , the fire-resistance rating of the enclosure must be at least 4 hours. Not only is it the intent to protect the room from an explosion fire but also, assuming the explosion venting results in minimal structural damage, for the enclosure to contain the resulting fire, if any, to the room of origin. Without venting, it is doubtful that the enclosure could withstand the forces exerted on the walls by an explosion.

426.1.3 Conveyors. Conveyors, chutes, piping and similar equipment passing through the enclosures of rooms or spaces shall be constructed dirt tight and vapor tight and be of approved noncombustible materials complying with Chapter 30.

The intent of this section is to restrict conveyors that pass-through walls so that they do not serve as an ignition source or avenue of fire spread to adjacent areas. These conveyors and similar equipment must be constructed of noncombustible materials and be dirt and vapor tight.

426.1.4 Explosion control. Explosion control shall be provided as specified in SBC 801, or spaces shall be equipped with the equivalent mechanical ventilation complying with SBC 501.

The pressure exerted by a combustible dust explosion typically ranges from 89 to 614 kPa. It is impractical to construct a building that will withstand such pressures; therefore, either a means of explosion control must be provided in accordance with Section 911 of SBC 801, or an equivalent mechanical ventilation system must be provided. The mechanical ventilation system must be in accordance with SBC 501 and must be designed to control the dust concentration below hazardous levels. The mechanical ventilation is dependent on the concentration at which a dust explosion could occur. Additional guidance on the relative fire risk associated with various combustible dusts can be found in the referenced standards.

426.1.5 Grain elevators. Grain elevators, malt houses and buildings for similar occupancies shall not be located within 9 m of interior lot lines or structures on the same lot, except where erected along a railroad right-of-way.

The 9 m separation between grain elevators (or similar structures with regard to lot lines) and other structures is intended to reduce the exposure hazard. It is intended not only to reduce the damage to the adjacent structure but also to minimize the potential that a fire in the adjacent structure would affect the grain elevator. Grain elevators are singled out because of the additional height permitted in Section 426.1.1 and the typical openness of the structure. The 9 m separation is not required where the grain elevator is located along a railroad right-of-way. The railroad right-of-way will offer some separation, except where a car is being loaded from the grain elevator, in which case the 9 m criterion may not be practical.

426.1.6 Coal pockets. Coal pockets located less than 9 m from interior lot lines or from structures on the same lot shall be constructed of not less than Type IB construction. Where more than 9 m from interior lot lines, or where erected along a railroad right-of-way, the minimum type of construction of such structures not more than 19 m in building height shall be Type IV.

Like grain elevators, coal pockets are typically open structures and there is a need to provide separation between the coal pocket and adjacent structures to reduce exposure fire risk. Type IB construction is the required minimum where a coal pocket is within 9 m of another structure or lot line. Like grain elevators, if the separation is in excess of 9 m, Type IV construction is permitted to a maximum building height of 19 m.

426.1.7 Tire rebuilding. Buffing operations shall be located in a room separated from the remainder of the building housing the tire rebuilding or tire recapping operation by a 1-hour fire barrier.

Exception: Buffing operations are not required to be separated where all of the following conditions are met:

1. Buffing operations are equipped with an approved continuous automatic water-spray system directed at the point of cutting action.

2. Buffing machines are connected to particle-collecting systems providing a minimum air movement of 710 liters per second in volume and 23 m/s in-line velocity.

3. The collecting system shall discharge the rubber particles to an approved outdoor noncombustible or fire-resistant container,

===== Page 0393 =====
which is emptied at frequent intervals to prevent overflow.

Tire rebuilding plants are classified in Group F-1 occupancies in accordance with Section 306.2. Depending on an evaluation of the actual hazards presented by a given operation, which could include grinding, buffing or gluing of tires or tire components, the plant or portions of it might be classified as Group H. This section specifies that the buffing operations must be separated from other operations by a 1-hour fire barrier. The intent is to keep the higher hazard operations separate, thereby reducing the potential for a rapidly spreading fire.

The exception recognizes that meeting the three outlined conditions will afford protection equivalent to the 1-hour fire barrier required by this section.

## SECTION 427 MEDICAL GAS SYSTEMS

427.1 General. Medical gases at health care-related facilities intended for patient or veterinary care shall comply with Sections 427.2 through 427.2.3 in addition to requirements of Chapter 53 of SBC 801.

Compressed gases used in health care-related facilities include oxygen, nitrogen and nitrogen oxides, carbon dioxide and other gases that pose a variety of hazards if not handled and stored properly. Oxygen, for example, represents both a fire and an explosion hazard. Nitrogen oxides are useful for sedation but can asphyxiate an unknowing occupant if there are uncontrolled amounts in a confined space. This Section is intended to minimize hazards by setting the requirements for storage and supply locations. Note that the use of the phrase "health care-related facilities" indicates the intent that these provisions apply to not only hospitals but also to nursing homes, ambulatory care facilities and veterinary care.

427.2 Interior supply location. Medical gases shall be located in areas dedicated to the storage of such gases without other storage or uses. Where containers of medical gases in quantities greater than the permitted amount are located inside the buildings, they shall be located in a 1-hour exterior room, 1-hour interior room or a gas cabinet in accordance with Section 427.2.1, 427.2.2 or 427.2.3, respectively. Rooms or areas where medical gases are stored or used in quantities exceeding the maximum allowable quantity per control area as set forth in Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2) shall be in accordance with Group H occupancies.

This section states that medical gases must be stored in dedicated areas not used for other storage or any other purpose. Where medical gases are stored inside buildings in quantities greater than the permitted amount under Section 105 of SBC 801, they are required to be in a 1-hour exterior room, in a 1-hour interior room or a gas cabinet in accordance with Section 427.2.1, 427.2.2 or 427.2.3.

The section also makes it clear that where hazardous gases are stored or used in quantities in excess of the maximum allowable quantity (MAQ) per control area, the storage room must be constructed as an appropriate Group H area.

427.2.1 One-hour exterior room. A 1-hour exterior room shall be a room or enclosure separated from the remainder of the building by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both, with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour. Openings between the room or enclosure and interior spaces shall be provided with self-closing smoke- and draft-control assemblies having a fire protection rating of not less than 1 hour. Rooms shall have not less than one exterior wall that is provided with not less than two vents. Each vent shall have a minimum free air opening of not less than 0.023 m² for each 28 m³ at normal temperature and pressure (NTP) of gas stored in the room and shall be not less than 0.0465 m² in aggregate free opening area. One vent shall be within 150 mm of the floor, and one shall be within 150 mm of the ceiling. Rooms shall be provided with not fewer than one automatic fire sprinkler to provide container cooling in case of fire.

This section contains specific construction, ventilation and suppression requirements for exterior rooms that contain medical gases in quantities requiring a permit under Section 105 of SBC 801. All openings between medical gas storage rooms and building interior spaces are required to be protected by self-closing smoke- and fire-rated assemblies to maintain separate airspaces. Even automatic-closing assemblies, which close on detection of fire or smoke, are not allowed since they cause the airspaces to be normally connected. The purpose of keeping airspaces separate is to prevent gas that may escape from a leak in the medical gas room from migrating into other areas of the building. These requirements are consistent with those of NFPA 99 and NFPA 101.

427.2.2 One-hour interior room. Where an exterior wall cannot be provided for the room, a 1-hour interior room shall be provided and shall be a room or enclosure separated from the remainder of the building by fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section

===== Page 0394 =====
711, or both, with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour. Openings between the room or enclosure and interior spaces shall be provided with self-closing smoke- and draft-control assemblies having a fire protection rating of not less than 1 hour. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed within the room. The room shall be exhausted through a duct to the exterior. Supply and exhaust ducts shall be enclosed in a 1-hour rated shaft enclosure from the room to the exterior. Approved mechanical ventilation shall comply with SBC 501 and be provided with a minimum rate of 0.00508 m \( ^{3} \) /s/m \( ^{2} \)  of the area of the room.

This Section contains specific construction, ventilation and suppression requirements for interior rooms that contain medical gases in quantities requiring a permit under Section 105 of SBC 801. Interior rooms must have mechanical ventilation with a protected duct system exhausting to the exterior. See the commentary to Section 427.2.1.

427.2.3 Gas cabinets. Gas cabinets shall be constructed in accordance with Section 5003.8.6 of SBC 801 and shall comply with the following:

1 Cabinets shall be exhausted to the exterior through a dedicated exhaust duct system installed in accordance with Chapter 5 of SBC 501.

2 Supply and exhaust ducts shall be enclosed in a 1-hour rated shaft enclosure from the cabinet to the exterior. The average velocity of ventilation at the face of access ports or windows shall be not less than 1.02 m/s with a minimum of 0.76 m/s at any point of the access port or window.

3 Cabinets shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system internal to the cabinet.

This section contains specific requirements for the construction of gas cabinets that contain medical gases in quantities requiring a permit under Section 105 of SBC 801. These requirements are in addition to those contained in Section 5003.8.6 of SBC 801. The cabinet ventilation system must be designed to operate at a negative pressure and be connected to an exhaust system to maintain a safe atmosphere inside the room in the event of a leak, especially during the normal opening and closing of the cabinet. Additionally, gas cabinets must be protected with an internal automatic sprinkler system to cool the gas cylinders housed in the cabinet in the event of a fire outside of the cabinet. Other types of extinguishing systems are prohibited.

## SECTION 428 HIGHER EDUCATION LABORATORIES

428.1 Scope. Higher education laboratories complying with the requirements of Sections 428.1 through 428.4 shall be permitted to exceed the maximum allowable quantities of hazardous materials in control areas set forth in Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2) without requiring classification as a Group H occupancy. Except as specified in Section 428, such laboratories shall comply with all applicable provisions of this code and SBC 801.

Section 428, in conjunction with Chapter 38 of SBC 801, provides a design option for higher education facilities that need to exceed the standard control area limitations found in Section 414 and Chapter 50 of SBC 801. This section allows for moderate increases in hazardous materials storage and use but imposes additional construction and operational controls in exchange for the increased allowances. It is very important to note that this section does not automatically apply to any new or existing higher education facilities. Only facilities that want to use the increased allowances, and can meet the additional requirements, would need to comply with this section.

428.2 Application. The provisions of Section 428 shall be applied as exceptions or additions to applicable requirements of this code. Unless specifically modified by Section 428, the storage, use and handling of hazardous materials shall comply with all other provisions in Chapters 38 and 50 through 67 of SBC 801 and this code for quantities not exceeding the maximum allowable quantity.

Higher education facilities still need to comply with all other requirements of this code and with Chapters 50 through 67 of SBC 801 except as modified by Sections 428.3 and 428.4.

428.3 Laboratory suite construction. Where laboratory suites are provided, they shall be constructed in accordance with this section and Chapter 38 of SBC 801. The number of laboratory suites and percentage of maximum allowable quantities of hazardous materials in laboratory suites shall be in accordance with Table 428.3.

When utilizing the allowances of Section 428, the building will be designed with laboratory suites which are very similar in concept to control areas. Chapter 38 of SBC 801 also contains detailed requirements for laboratory suite construction that are correlated. Users must utilize both codes when determining requirements for construction of laboratory suites.

===== Page 0395 =====
Laboratory suites provide a much higher level of fire and hazardous materials protection than the traditional control area design described in Section 414. Besides the additional requirements found in this section, laboratory suites are required to have:

Rated fire barriers for compartmentation of laboratory suites within buildings.

- Standby or emergency power for safety-related equipment and enhanced automatic sprinkler protection in laboratories above the sixth story or in a story below grade plane.

- Automatic sprinkler design and density exceeding that which would be required by NFPA 45.

See Table 428.3.

Table 428.3 identifies the number of laboratory suites allowed per floor in a building. The table then identifies the percentage of MAQ that is allowed in each laboratory suite. This table supports the design concept that is nearly identical to the control area concept in the codes.

428.3.1 Separation from other nonlaboratory areas. Laboratory suites shall be separated from other portions of the building in accordance with the most restrictive of the following:

1 Fire barriers and horizontal assemblies as required in Table 428.3. Fire barriers shall be constructed in accordance with Section 707 and horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711.

Exception: Where an individual laboratory suite occupies more than one story, the fire-resistance rating of intermediate floors contained within the laboratory suite shall comply with the requirements of this code.

2 Separations as required by Section 508.

This section identifies the required separation of laboratory suites from nonlaboratory suites. For example, the separation of a Group B laboratory suite from a Group A-3 lecture hall must use the more restrictive of the two identified criteria.

The portions of a building that are not laboratory suites would follow all other building and fire code requirements. As related to hazardous materials compliance, other portions of the building that are not laboratory suites would follow standard control area requirements or could be a Group H occupancy. A building can contain both laboratory suites and control areas, but the total combined number is limited in Section 428.3.4.
428.3.2 Separation from other laboratory suites. Laboratory suites shall be separated from other laboratory suites in accordance with Table 428.3.

This section refers to Table 428.3 for the separation requirements between laboratory suites.

428.3.3 Floor assembly fire resistance. The floor assembly supporting laboratory suites and the construction supporting the floor of laboratory suites shall have a fire resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.

Exception: The floor assembly of the laboratory suites and the construction supporting the floor of the laboratory suites are allowed to be 1-hour fire-resistance rated in buildings of Types IIA, IIIA and VA construction, provided that the building is three or fewer stories.

This section requires 2-hour rated floor assemblies, regardless of the rating required for separation walls. Where 2-hour floor assemblies are required, the structure supporting those floors must also be 2-hour rated. The exception provides the only break from the 2-hour requirement. Where a building is Type IIA, IIIA or VA construction and is three or fewer stories, the floor assemblies can be 1-hour fire-resistance rated and supported by 1-hour construction.

428.3.4 Maximum number. The maximum number of laboratory suites shall be in accordance with Table 428.3. Where a building contains both laboratory suites and control areas, the total number of laboratory suites and control areas within a building shall not exceed the maximum number of laboratory suites in accordance with Table 428.3.

As in other sections of Section 428, the limit on the number of laboratory suites is provided in Table 428.3.

428.3.5 Means of egress. Means of egress shall be in accordance with Chapter 10.

Section 428 does not modify any egress requirements. Therefore, buildings containing laboratory suites must comply with Chapter 10 for egress requirements based on the occupancy classification, occupant load and other factors prescribed in the code.

428.3.6 Standby or emergency power. Standby or emergency power shall be provided in accordance with Section 414.5.2 where laboratory suites are located above the sixth story above grade plane or located in a story below grade plane.

Emergency or standby power is necessary where required in Section 414.5.2. It only applies if there are laboratory suites one story below grade plane, or where located more than six stories above grade plane.

===== Page 0396 =====
428.3.7 Ventilation. Ventilation shall be in accordance with Chapter 7 of NFPA 45, and SBC 501.

Laboratory ventilation must be in accordance with Chapter 7 of NFPA 45 and SBC 501. NFPA 45 has ventilation criteria specific to laboratories, including chemical fume hoods, local ventilated enclosures, fume arms, special local exhaust devices and other systems for exhausting air from laboratory work areas in which flammable gases, vapors or particulate matter are released. This provides an additional level of safety in laboratories. Chapters 4, 5, and 6 of SBC 501 contain many of the general construction requirements for ventilation, exhaust systems and duct systems. Chapter 5 of SBC 501 addresses requirements for hazardous exhaust systems and Chapter 7 of NFPA 45 further complements those provisions by providing very specific requirements for the type of system or hazardous material used.

428.3.8 Liquid-tight floor. Portions of laboratory suites where hazardous materials are present shall be provided with a liquid-tight floor.

As an additional safety precaution, this section requires a liquid-tight floor in all laboratories or laboratory suites utilizing Section 428. This does not require drainage control or secondary containment; it only requires that the floor be liquid tight to prevent spills from penetrating the floor and to allow for clean up without contaminating underlying materials or floor levels. This can be accomplished with epoxy or other resinous floor systems, impermeable floor materials that are monolithic/seamless or have welded seams, and other similar systems. There are many options available for flooring materials and systems designed specifically for laboratories that meet this requirement. This section also inherently requires that any penetrations are sealed to maintain liquid tight integrity.

428.3.9 Automatic fire-extinguishing systems. Buildings containing laboratory suites shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

To use Section 428 as a design method, automatic sprinkler protection must be part of the design for the entire building.

428.4 Percentage of maximum allowable quantity in each laboratory suite. The percentage of maximum allowable quantities of hazardous materials in each laboratory suite shall be in accordance with Table 428.3.

Table 428.3 provides the limitations for these laboratory suites. In this case, it is the maximum allowable quantities.

===== Page 0397 =====
## Bibliography

The following resource materials were used in the preparation of the commentary for this chapter of the code:

1 ANSI A13.1-07, Scheme for the Identification of Piping Systems. New York: American National Standards Institute, 2007.

2 ASME B31.3-12, Process Piping. New York: American National Standards Institute, 2012.

3 ASTM C1628-06, Specification for Joints for Concrete Gravity Flow Sewer Pipe, Using Rubber Gaskets. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2006.

4 ASTM C1629/C1629M-06, (2011) Standard Classification for Abuse-resistant Nondecorated Interior Gypsum Panel Products and Fiber-reinforced Cement Panels. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2011.

5 ASTM E84-2013A, Test Methods for Surface-burning Characteristics of Building Materials. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2013.

6 ASTM E119-2012A, Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2012.

7 ASTM E695-09, Method for Measuring Relative Resistance of Wall, Floor, and Roof Construction to Impact Loading. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2009.

8 ASTM E736-00 (2011), Test Method for Cohesion/Adhesion of Sprayed Fire-resistive Materials Applied to Structural Members. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2011.

9 Bain, A., J. Barclay, T. Bose, F. Edeskuty, M. Farlie, J. Hansel, R. Hay and M. Swain (et al). Sourcebook for Hydrogen Application. Golden, CO: Hydrogen Research Institute and National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 1998.

10 Boring, Delbert F. and others. Fire Protection Through Modern Building Codes, 5th ed. Washington, DC: American Iron and Steel Institute, 1981.

11 Final Report of the National Construction Safety Team on the Collapses of the World Trade Center Towers. Washington, DC: National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2005.

12 Fire Protection Handbook, 20th ed. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2008.

13 Fothergill, John W. and John H. Klote. Design of Smoke Control Systems for Buildings. Atlanta: American Society for Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1983.

14 ICC/ANSI A117.1-09, Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities. Washington, DC: International Code Council, 2010.

15 ICC 500-14, ICC/NSSA Standard on the Design and Construction of Storm Shelters. Washington, DC: International Code Council, 2014.

16 NFPA 13-13, Installation of Sprinkler Systems. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013.

17 NFPA 13-D-13, Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013.

18 NFPA 13R-13, Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and Including Four Stories in Height. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013.

19 NFPA 30-12, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2011.

20 NFPA 30A-15, Code for Motor Fuel-dispensing Facilities and Repair Garages. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2015.

21 NFPA 30B-15, Manufacture and Storage of Aerosol Products. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2015.

22 NFPA 32-11, Dry Cleaning Plants. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2011.

23 NFPA 33-15, Spray Application Using Flammable and Combustible Materials. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2015.

24 NFPA 34-15, Dipping and Coating Processes Using Flammable or Combustible Liquids. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2015.

===== Page 0398 =====
25 NFPA 35-11, Manufacture of Organic Coatings. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2011.

26 NFPA 40-11, Storage and Handling of Cellulose Nitrate Film. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2011.

27 NFPA 50A-99, Gaseous Hydrogen Systems at Consumer Sites. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 1999.

28 NFPA 58-14, Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2014.

29 NFPA 61-13, Prevention of Fires and Dust Explosions in Agricultural Food Products Facilities. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013.

30 NFPA 68-07, Explosion Protection by Deflagration Venting. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2007.

31 NFPA 69-14, Explosion Prevention Systems. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2014.

32 SBC 401, Saudi Electrical Code, 2024.

33 NFPA 72-13, National Fire Alarm Code. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013.

34 NFPA 80-13, Fire Doors and Other Opening Protectives. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013.

35 NFPA 99-15, Standard for Health Care Facilities. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2015.

36 NFPA 110-13, Emergency and Standby Power Systems. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013.

37 NFPA 111-13, Stored Electrical Energy Emergency and Standby Power Systems. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013.

38 NFPA 120-15, Coal Preparation Plants. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2015.

39 NFPA 251-06, Standard Methods of Tests of Building Endurance of Building Construction and Materials. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2006.

40 NFPA 318-15, Standard for the Protection of Semiconductor Fabrication Facilities. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2015.

41 NFPA 409-11, Aircraft Hangars. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2011.

42 NFPA 418-11, Standard for Heliports. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2011.

43 NFPA 484-15, Combustible Metals. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2015.

44 NFPA 495-13, Explosive Materials Code. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013.

45 NFPA 654-13, Prevention of Fire and Dust Explosions from the Manufacturing, Processing and Handling of Combustible Particulate Solids. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013.

46 NFPA 655-12, Prevention of Sulfur Fires and Explosions. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2011.

47 NFPA 664-12, Prevention of Fires and Explosions in Wood Processing and Wood-working Facilities. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2011.

48 NFPA 701-10, Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Flame-propagation of Textiles and Films. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2010.

49 NFPA 704-12, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2011.

50 NFPA 1124-06, Manufacture, Transportation and Storage of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2006.

51 NFPA, Fire Protection Guide on Hazardous Materials. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2002.

52 NIST IR 5240-93, Measurement of Room Conditions and Response of Sprinklers and Smoke Detectors During a Simulated Two-bed Hospital Patient Room Fire. Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology, July 1993.

53 UL 217-06, Single- and Multiple-station Smoke Detectors with Revisions through August 2005. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories Inc., 2006.

54 UL 268-09, Smoke Detectors for Fire Protection Signaling. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories Inc., 2009.

55 UL 325-02, Door, Drapery, Gate, Louver and Window Operations and Systems—with Revisions through February 2006. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories Inc., 2002.

===== Page 0399 =====
56 UL 1994-04, Standard for Luminous Egress Path Marking Systems, with Revisions through February of 2005. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories Inc., 2005.

57 UL 2075-2013, Standard for Gas and Vapor Detectors and Sensors. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories Inc., 2013.

===== Page 0400 =====
## TABLES AND FIGURES OF CHAPTER 4

TABLE 403.2.4

MINIMUM BOND STRENGTH

<table>HEIGHT OF BUILDING \( ^{a} \)SFRM MINIMUM BOND STRENGTHUp to 128 meters21 kN/m \( ^{2} \)Greater than 128 meters48 kN/m \( ^{2} \)</table>

a. Above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.

TABLE 406.5.4

OPEN PARKING GARAGES AREA AND HEIGHT

<table><td rowspan="4">TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION<td rowspan="4">AREA PER TIER (Square meters)<td colspan="3">HEIGHT (in tiers)<td rowspan="3">Ramp accessMechanical accessAutomatic sprinkler systemNoYesIAUnlimitedUnlimitedUnlimitedUnlimitedIBUnlimited12 tiers12 tiers18 tiersIIA464510 tiers10 tiers15 tiersIIB46458 tiers8 tiers12 tiersIV46454 tiers4 tiers4 tiers</table>

TABLE 412.2.1.1

HEIGHT LIMITATIONS FOR AIRPORT TRAFFIC CONTROL TOWERS

<table>TYPE OF CONSTRUCTIONHEIGHTa(Meters)IAUnlimitedIB73IIA30IIB26IIIA20</table>

a. Height to be measured from grade plane to cab floor.

TABLE 412.3.6

HANGAR FIRE SUPPRESSION REQUIREMENTS \( ^{a,b,c} \)

<table><td colspan="12">MAXIMUM TYPE OF CONSTRUCTIONSINGLE AREA (square meter)FIREIAIBIIAIIBIIIAIIIBIVVAVB≥ 3,701Group IGroup IGroup IGroup IGroup IGroup IGroup IGroup IGroup IGroup I3700Group IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup II2800Group IIIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup II1900Group IIIGroup IIIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup II1400Group IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup IIGroup II1100Group IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIGroup II750Group IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup II465Group IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup IIIGroup III</table>

a. Aircraft hangars with a door height greater than 8.5 meters shall be provided with fire suppression for a Group I hangar regardless of maximum fire area.

b. Groups shall be as classified in accordance with NFPA 409.

c. Membrane structures complying with Section 3102 shall be classified as a Group IV hangar.

===== Page 0401 =====
TABLE 412.6

AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING EXIT ACCESS TRAVEL DISTANCE (METERS)

<table><td rowspan="2">Height (meters) \( ^{b} \)<td colspan="6">Manufacturing Area (m \( ^{2} \) ) \( ^{a} \)\( \geq \) 14,000\( \geq \) 18,600\( \geq \) 23,225\( \geq \) 46,450\( \geq \) 70,000\( \geq \) 93,000\( \geq \) 7.5125140150150150150\( \geq \) 15125150180210210210\( \geq \) 23125150210260305305\( \geq \) 30.5125150230305380460</table>

a. Contiguous floor area of the aircraft manufacturing facility having the indicated height.

b. Minimum height from finished floor to bottom of ceiling or roof slab or deck.

TABLE 414.2.2

DESIGN AND NUMBER OF CONTROL AREAS

<table><td colspan="2">FLOOR LEVELPERCENTAGE OF THE MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY PER CONTROL AREA \( ^{a} \)NUMBER OF CONTROL AREAS PER FLOORFIRE-RESISTANCE RATING FOR FIRE BARRIERS IN HOURS \( ^{b} \)<td rowspan="7">Above grade planeHigher than 95127-9522612.522512.522412.5223502127531110041<td rowspan="2">Below grade plane1753125021Lower than 2Not AllowedNot AllowedNot Allowed</table>

a. Percentages shall be of the maximum allowable quantity per control area shown in Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2), with all increases allowed in the notes to those tables.

b. Separation shall include fire barriers and horizontal assemblies as necessary to provide separation from other portions of the building.

===== Page 0402 =====
TABLE 414.2.5(1)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY PER INDOOR AND OUTDOOR CONTROL AREA

<table><td colspan="2">CONDITION<td colspan="3">MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY PER CONTROL AREAMaterial \( ^{a} \)ClassSolids (kilograms)Liquids (liters)<td colspan="5">A. Health-hazard materials nonflammable and noncombustible solids and liquids1. Corrosives \( ^{b,c} \)Not Applicable442537002. Highly toxicsNot Applicable9 \( ^{b,c} \)7.5 \( ^{b,c} \)3. Toxics \( ^{b,c} \)Not Applicable450375<td colspan="5">B. Physical-hazard materials nonflammable and noncombustible solids and liquids<td rowspan="3">1. Oxidizers \( ^{b,c} \)4Not AllowedNot Allowed3520 \( ^{a} \)43521020 \( ^{a} \)850<td rowspan="4">2. Unstable (reactives) \( ^{b,c} \)18150 \( ^{a,j} \)6800 \( ^{a,j} \)4Not AllowedNot Allowed32502002520435<td rowspan="3">3. Water (reactives)1Not LimitedNot Limited3 \( ^{b,c} \)2502002 \( ^{c} \)5204351Not LimitedNot Limited</table>

a. Hazard categories are as specified in SBC 801.

b. Maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent in buildings that are sprinkled in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. When Note c also applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.

c. Maximum allowable quantities shall be increased 100 percent when stored in approved storage cabinets, in accordance with SBC 801. When Note b also applies, the increase for both notes shall be applied accumulatively.

d. See Table 414.2.2 for design and number of control areas.

e. Allowable quantities for other hazardous material categories shall be in accordance with Section 307.

f. Maximum quantities shall be increased 100 percent in outdoor control areas.

g. Maximum amounts shall be increased to 1,020 kg when individual packages are in the original sealed containers from the manufacturer or packager and do not exceed 4.5 kg each.

h. Maximum amounts shall be increased to 2,040 kg when individual packages are in the original sealed containers from the manufacturer or packager and do not exceed 4.5 kg each.

i. The permitted quantities shall not be limited in a building equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

j. Quantities are unlimited in an outdoor control area.

TABLE 414.2.5(2)

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE QUANTITY OF FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS

<table><td rowspan="2">Type of Liquid<td colspan="4">Maximum Allowable Quantity Per Control Area (liters)Sprinklered in accordance with note b densities and arrangementsSprinklered in accordance with Table 5704.3.6.3(4) through 5704.3.6.3(8) and 5704.3.7.5.1 of SBC 801NonsprinkleredClass IA225225112.5Class IB, IC, II and IIIA28,40056,8006,050Class IIIBUnlimitedUnlimited50,000</table>

a. Control areas shall be separated from each other by not less than a 1-hour fire barrier wall.

b. To be considered as sprinkled, a building shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system with a design providing minimum densities as follows:

1. For uncartoned commodities on shelves 1.8 meters or less in height where the ceiling height does not exceed 5.5 meters, quantities are those permitted with a minimum sprinkler design density of Ordinary Hazard Group 2.

2. For cartoned, palletized or racked commodities where storage is 1.4 meters or less in height and where the ceiling height does not exceed 5.5 meters, quantities are those permitted with a minimum sprinkler design density of 8.6 Liters per minute per square meter over the most remote 140 square-meters area.

c. Where wholesale and retail sales or storage areas exceed 4,645 square meters in area, the maximum allowable quantities are allowed to be increased by 2 percent for each 100 square meters of area in excess of 4,645 square meters, up to a maximum of 100 percent of the table amounts. A control area separation is not required. The cumulative amounts, including amounts attained by having an additional control area, shall not exceed 113,600 liters.

===== Page 0403 =====
TABLE 414.5.1
EXPLOSION CONTROL REQUIREMENTS a,h

<table><td rowspan="2">MATERIAL<td rowspan="2">CLASS<td colspan="3">EXPLOSION CONTROL METHODSBarricade constructionExplosion (deflagration) systemsbventing or prevention<td colspan="5">HAZARD CATEGORYCombustible dusts—Not RequiredRequiredCryogenic flammables—Not RequiredRequired<td rowspan="5">ExplosivesDivision 1.1RequiredNot RequiredDivision 1.2RequiredNot RequiredDivision 1.3Not RequiredRequiredDivision 1.4Not RequiredRequiredDivision 1.5RequiredNot Required<td rowspan="2">Flammable gasGaseousNot RequiredRequiredLiquefiedNot RequiredRequired<td rowspan="2">Flammable liquidIAaNot RequiredRequiredIBcNot RequiredRequired<td rowspan="2">Organic peroxidesURequiredNot PermittedIRequiredNot PermittedOxidizer liquids and solids4RequiredNot PermittedPyrophoric gas—Not RequiredRequired<td rowspan="3">Unstable (reactive)4RequiredNot Permitted3RequiredNot Permitted3Not RequiredRequiredWater-reactive liquids and solids3Not RequiredRequiredSPECIAL USESAcetylene generator rooms—Not RequiredRequiredGrain processing—Not RequiredRequiredLiquefied petroleum gas-distribution facilities—Not RequiredRequiredWhere explosion hazards existfDenotation DeflagrationRequired Not RequiredNot Permitted Required</table>

a. See Section 414.1.3.

b. See SBC 801.

c. As generated during manufacturing or processing.

d. Storage or use.

e. In open use or dispensing.

f. Rooms containing dispensing and use of hazardous materials when an explosive environment can occur because of the characteristics or nature of the hazardous materials or as a result of the dispensing or use process.

g. A method of explosion control shall be provided when Class 2 water-reactive materials can form potentially explosive mixtures.

h. Explosion venting is not required for Group H-5 fabrication areas complying with Section 415.11.1 and SBC 801.

===== Page 0404 =====
TABLE 415.6.5

DETACHED BUILDING REQUIRED

<table><td colspan="5">A DETACHED STORAGE IS REQUIRED WHEN THE QUANTITY OF MATERIAL EXCEEDS THAT LISTED HEREINMaterialClassSolids and Liquids (metric tons) a,bGases (cubic meters) a,b<td rowspan="5">ExplosivesDivision 1.1Maximum Allowable QuantityDivision 1.2Maximum Allowable QuantityDivision 1.3Maximum Allowable QuantityDivision 1.4Maximum Allowable QuantityNot ApplicableDivision 1.4c0.90Division 1.5Maximum Allowable QuantityDivision 1.6Maximum Allowable QuantityOxidizersClass 4Maximum Allowable QuantityMaximum Allowable QuantityAllowableUnstable (reactives) detonableClass 3 or 4Maximum Allowable QuantityMaximum Allowable QuantityAllowable<td rowspan="2">Oxidizer, liquids and solidsClass 31100Not ApplicableClass 21800Not Applicable<td rowspan="4">Organic peroxidesDetonableMaximum Allowable QuantityNot ApplicableClass IMaximum Allowable QuantityNot ApplicableClass II22.5Not ApplicableClass III45Not ApplicableUnstable (reactives) non-detonableClass 30.955Water reactivesClass 222.5280<td rowspan="2">Pyrophoric gasesClass 30.9Not ApplicableClass 222.5Not Applicable</table>

a. For materials that are detonable, the distance to other buildings or lot lines shall be in accordance with Chapter 56 of SBC 801 based on trinitrotoluene (TNT) equivalence of the material. For materials classified as explosives, see Chapter 56 of SBC 801.

b. "Maximum Allowable Quantity" means the maximum allowable quantity per control area set forth in Table 307.1(1).

c. Limited to Division 1.4 materials and articles, including articles packaged for shipment, that are not regulated as an explosive or unpackaged articles used in process operations that do not propagate a detonation or deflagration between articles, provided the net explosive weight (mass) of individual articles does not exceed 0.5 kilogram.

===== Page 0405 =====
TABLE 415.11.1.1.1

QUANTITY LIMITS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS IN A SINGLE FABRICATION

<table>HAZARD CATEGORYSOLIDS (kg per m²)LIQUIDS (liters per m²)GAS (m³ @ NTP per m²)<td colspan="4">PHYSICAL-HAZARD MATERIALSCombustible dustNote bNot ApplicableNot ApplicableCombustible fiberNote bNot ApplicableNot ApplicableCombustible liquidNote b,cNot ApplicableNot ApplicableCombustible ClassII0.40.8Combustible liquidIIIA0.8Not LimitedCombustible ClassIIIB1.6Not ApplicableCombustible ClassI, II and IIIA1.6Not ApplicableCryogenic gasFlammableNot ApplicableNot ApplicableExplosivesOxidizingNot ApplicableNot ApplicableFlammable gasGaseousNot ApplicableNot ApplicableFlammable liquidLiquefied0.100.38Flammable liquidA1.01.0Flammable liquidIB1.01.0Flammable liquidIC1.01.0Combination ClassIA, IB and IC1.01.0Combination ClassI, II and IIIA1.61.6Flammable solid0.005Not ApplicableNot ApplicableOrganic peroxideUnclassified detonableNote bNot ApplicableOrganic peroxideClass I0.1250.5Organic peroxideClass II0.5Not LimitedOrganic peroxideClass III0.5Not LimitedOrganic peroxideClass IV0.5Not LimitedOrganic peroxideClass V0.5Not LimitedOxidizing gasGaseous0.380.38Oxidizing gasLiquefied0.380.38Combination of gaseous and liquefiedNot Applicable0.380.38OxidizerClass 40.0151.2OxidizerClass 30.0151.2OxidizerClass 20.0151.2OxidizerClass 10.0151.2Combination classClass 1, 2, 30.050.05Pyrophoric materialClass 40.050.05Unstable reactiveClass 30.1250.10Unstable reactiveClass 20.50.40Unstable reactiveClass 10.50.40</table>

===== Page 0406 =====
TABLE 415.11.1.1.1

(CONTINUED) QUANTITY LIMITS FOR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS IN A SINGLE FABRICATION

<table>HAZARD CATEGORYSOLIDS (kg per m²)LIQUIDS (liters per m²)GAS (m³ @ NTP per m³)<td colspan="4">PHYSICAL-HAZARD MATERIALS<td rowspan="3">Water reactiveClass 3Note b0.05Class 21.21.0Class 1Not LimitedNot Limited<td colspan="4">HEALTH-HAZARD MATERIALSCorrosivesNot LimitedNot LimitedNot LimitedHighly toxicNot LimitedNot LimitedNote dToxicsNot LimitedNot LimitedNote d</table>

a. Hazardous materials within piping shall not be included in the calculated quantities.

b. Quantity of hazardous materials in a single fabrication shall not exceed the maximum allowable quantities per control area in Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2).

c. Densely packed baled cotton that complies with the packing requirements of ISO 8115 shall not be included in this material class.

d. The aggregate quantity of flammable, pyrophoric, toxic, and highly toxic gases shall not exceed 255 cubic meters at NTP.

e. The aggregate quantity of pyrophoric gases in the building shall not exceed the amounts set forth in Table 415.6.5.

TABLE 428.3

DESIGN AND NUMBER OF LABORATORY SUITES PER FLOOR

<table>Floor levelPercentage of the maximum allowable quantity per lab suite \( ^{a} \)NUMBER OF LAB SUITES PER FLOORFIRE-RESISTANCE RATING FOR FIRE BARRIERS IN HOURS \( ^{b} \)<td rowspan="6">Above Grade Plane21+Not allowedNot Permitted16-2025111-155017-105024-675431004<td rowspan="3">Below Grade Plane1-2100617542502Lower than 2Not allowedNot allowedNot allowed</table>

a. Percentages shall be of the maximum allowable quantity per control area shown in Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2), with all increases allowed in the footnotes to those tables.

b. Fire barriers shall include walls, floors and ceilings necessary to provide separation from other portions of the building.

c. Vertical fire barriers separating laboratory suites from other spaces on the same floor shall be permitted to be 1-hour fire-resistance rated.

===== Page 0407 =====
REPRESENTS GROSS LEASABLE AREA

FIGURE 402.1
COVERED MALL BUILDING

FIGURE 402.1.1
OPEN MALL PERIMETER

===== Page 0408 =====
A WALL CONSTRUCTED AS REQUIRED FOR AN EXTERIOR WALL

2 WALL CONSTRUCTED AS REQUIRED FOR A TENANT SEPARATION BY SECTION 402.4.2.1

3 WALL CONSTRUCTED AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 402.4.2.2 (FIRE WALL OR FIRE BARRIER)

4 UNPROTECTED OPENING

5 WALL CONSTRUCTED AS REQUIRED BY SECTION 402.4.2

FIGURE 402.4

TENANT SPACE AND ANCHOR BUILDING SEPARATIONS

===== Page 0409 =====
FIGURE 402.4.3
MINIMUM WIDTH OF OPEN MALL

===== Page 0410 =====
MAXIMUM AREA OF SIGN IS LIMITED TO 20 PERCENT OF WALL AREA

FIGURE 402.6.4
STOREFRONT SIGNAGE WITH PLASTIC SIGNS

===== Page 0411 =====
FIGURE 402.8
MEANS OF EGRESS

===== Page 0412 =====
FIGURE 402.8.1.1
COVERED MALL MINIMUM WIDTH

FIGURE 403.1(1)
HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS

===== Page 0413 =====
WHERE WIND VELOCITIES ARE CONSIDERABLY GREATER AT UPPER LEVELS, SUCTION ON "DOWNWIND" SIDE CAN CAUSE INCREASED PRESSURE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN UPPER AND LOWER LEVELS.

FIGURE 403.1(2)
HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS—STACK EFFECT

===== Page 0414 =====
FIGURE 403.1(3)
HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS—EVACUATION TIMES

EXAMPLE:
DIAGONAL DIMENSION = 40 m
% OF DIAGONAL = 40 m ÷ 4 = 10 M
SINCE % DIAGONAL EXCEED 9 m -
ENCLOSURES MUST BE SEPARATED BY 9 m

FIGURE 403.5.1

HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS: REMOTENESS OF INTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAY ENCLOSURES

===== Page 0415 =====
FIGURE 403.6.1

HIGH-RISE BUILDINGS: FIRE SERVICE ACCESS ELEVATORS

ATRIUM ≥ 3 STORIES
SMOKE CONTROL REQUIRED

2 STORY ATRIUMS
SMOKE CONTROL NOT REQUIRED

FIGURE 404.6(1)

ENCLOSURE OF ATRIUMS (EXCEPTION 1)

===== Page 0416 =====
FIGURE 404.6(2)
ENCLOSURE OF ATRIUMS (EXCEPTION 3)

① ENTRY TO EXIT STAIR IN THE ATRIUM

② ACCESS FROM TWO DIRECTIONS

③ DISTANCE BETWEEN ENTRIES OF EXIT STAIRWAYS TO COMPLY WITH SECTION 1007.1.1

④ EXIT ACCESS TRAVEL DISTANCE

⑤ NOT MORE THAN 50% OF EXIT STAIRWAYS TO BE IN THE ATRIUM

FIGURE 404(10)

EXIT STAIRWAY IN ATRIUM

===== Page 0417 =====
FIGURE 405.1
EXAMPLES OF UNDERGROUND BUILDINGS

===== Page 0418 =====
FIGURE 405.4
EXAMPLE OF COMPARTMENTATION, ELEVATOR PROTECTION AND EGRESS OF AN UNDERGROUND BUILDING

===== Page 0419 =====
FIGURE 405.4.1
EXAMPLE OF HORIZONTAL COMPARTMENTATION

===== Page 0420 =====
A1, A2 = AERA OF OPENINGS
L1, L2 = LENGTH OF OPENINGS
L1 + L2 > 40 PERCENT OF BUILDING PERIMETER
A1 + A2 > 20 PERCENT OF BUILDING PERIMETER WALLAREA

FIGURE 406.5.2
TWO-STORY OPEN PARKING GARAGE

===== Page 0421 =====
SD) FIRE DETECTION (SEE SECTION 407.8)

FIGURE 407.2.2
GROUP I-2: CARE PROVIDERS' STATION

FIGURE 407.2.5
NURSING HOME HOUSING UNIT

===== Page 0422 =====
FIGURE 407.2.6(1)
NURSING HOME WITH OPEN-PLAN KITCHEN

FIGURE 407.2.6(2)
NURSING HOME HOUSING UNIT FLOOR PLAN

===== Page 0423 =====
FIRE-RESISTANCE-RATED FIRE BARRIER: OR

PROVIDE CONSTRUCTION CAPABLE OF RESISTING THE PASSAGE OF SMOKE (SEE SECTION 509.4)

SMOKE PARTITION (SEE SECTIONS 710 & 407.3)

FIGURE 407.3
GROUP I-2: CORRIDOR WALLS

PATIENT SLEEPING SUITE GREATER THAN 93 SQ meter OR PATIENT TREATMENT SUITES GREATER THAN 232 SQ meter, TWO REMOTE EXIT ACCESS DOORS REQUIRED

FIGURE 407.4.4
GROUP I-2 EXAMPLE OF SUITE

===== Page 0424 =====


===== Page 0425 =====
FIGURE 407.5.4(1)
ACCEPTABLE EGRESS ARRANGEMENT

IF PATIENTS ARE MOVED FROM COMPARTMENT B TO C, THERE IS NO EXIT AVAILABLE WITHOUT RETURNING TO COMPARTMENT B; THEREFORE, COMPARTMENT C IS A "DEAD-END" SMOKE COMPARTMENT.

FIGURE 407.5.4(2)
UNACCEPTABLE EGRESS ARRANGEMENT

===== Page 0426 =====
CONDITION 5

DETENTION AND CORRECTIONAL OCCUPANCY CONDITIONS.

LOCKED

RL) LOCKED — REMOTE-CONTROLLED RELEASE OR EQUIVALENT

SB) SMOKE BARRIER OR HORIZONTAL EXIT FIGURE 408.1

GROUP 1-3: OCCUPANCY CONDITIONS

===== Page 0427 =====
- INDICATES LOCKS REQUIRING MANUAL RELEASE
FIGURE 408.4.1
GROUP I-3: MANUAL RELEASE

FIGURE 408.5.1(1)
GROUP I-3: VERTICAL OPENINGS

===== Page 0428 =====
BOTH STAIRS SIZED FOR CUMULATIVE OCCUPANCY IN ACCORDANCE WITH CONDITION 2 OF THE EXCEPTION

FIGURE 408.5.1(2)
GROUP I-3: VERTICAL OPENINGS

FIGURE 408.6.1
GROUP I-3: SMOKE COMPARTMENTS

===== Page 0429 =====
• CELL BLOCK A MAY FIND REFUGE IN CELL BLOCK B OR GYM
• CELL BLOCK B MAY FIND REFUGE IN CELL BLOCK A OR GYM
• GYM MAY FIND REFUGE IN CELL BLOCK A OR B

= REFUGE AREAS AT 0.6 sq. m PER OCCUPANT

FIGURE 408.6.2
GROUP I-3: REFUGE AREA

FIGURE 414.2
CONTROL AREAS

===== Page 0430 =====
*ASSUME CLASS IB FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS

FIGURE 414.2.2
CONTROL AREAS

FIGURE 415.11.2
ALLOWABLE HPM CORRIDOR ARRANGEMENTS

===== Page 0431 =====
FIGURE 415.11.12.1
CROSS-SECTIONAL DIAMETERS OF VARIOUS-SHAPED DUCTS

FIGURE 422.2

EXAMPLE OF SEPARATION FOR AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY

===== Page 0432 =====
FIGURE 422.3(1)

EXAMPLE OF SMOKE COMPARTMENTS WITH AMBULATORY CARE FACILITIES

FIGURE 422.3(2)

EXAMPLE OF SMOKE COMPARTMENTS WITH AMBULATORY CARE FACILITIES

===== Page 0433 =====
This page left intentionally blank

