===== Page 0434 =====
# CHAPTER 5—GENERAL BUILDING HEIGHTS AND AREAS

## General Comments

Chapter 5 contains the provisions that regulate the minimum type of construction of a building, including allowable heights and areas; mezzanines; unlimited area structures; mixed occupancies; and special provisions. The occupancy (or occupancies) and type of construction of a building are of key importance to the application of these provisions.

Section 501.1 gives the scope of Chapter 5. It specifies that the provisions of Chapter 5 apply not only to new construction, but also to existing building additions.

Section 502 requires that each new and existing building be provided with an address legible from the street.

Section 503 addresses the general allowable height and area limitations of buildings. This section points to separate sections for limitations on building height, number of stories and allowable building area. There are three tables—Table 504.3 for building height in meter, Table 504.4 for building height in stories and Table 506.2 for building area.

Section 504 addresses the height limits of buildings in both meter and number of stories. Table 504.3 provides the height limits, in meter, based on the type of construction, and Table 504.4 provides the maximum allowable number of stories above grade based on the type of construction. Both tables give allowable heights or number of stories with and without sprinkler systems.

Section 505 provides the criteria and regulations for mezzanines and industrial equipment platforms.

Section 506 addresses area limits for a building. Table 506.2 provides tabular areas for buildings based on the type of construction and occupancy classification for buildings with and without sprinkler systems. In addition, the allowable area can be increased further, depending on the extent of a building's street frontage.

Section 507 includes requirements for buildings with no area limitation. These provisions are commonly used for very large retail sales buildings, industrial warehouses and factories.

Section 508 provides requirements for buildings with multiple occupancies.
Section 509 addresses incidental uses such as waste and linen collection rooms, laundry rooms and incinerator rooms.

Section 510 contains special options for buildings that modify the general limitations of a building's allowable height and/or area.

Chapter 5 is an important chapter in the code because many other code requirements depend on the establishment of the minimum required type of construction for a building. A construction type must be established for each building. Then with consideration of the occupancy or occupancies, the maximum allowable height, number of stories and building area can be established (see Table 504.3, Table 504.4 and Table 506.2). Without the correct determination of the minimum type of construction, misapplication of the code is probable.

Sections 504 and 506 provide the foundation for setting thresholds for building size based on the building's use and the materials with which it is constructed. The aim is to reduce risk of injury to an acceptable level for building occupants by limiting fire load and fire hazards relating to height, area and occupancy.

## Purpose

Following occupancy classification of uses based on Chapter 3, the code review for the design of any building continues with Chapter 5, with the determination of the minimum required type of construction based on the use and size of the building. Misapplication of Chapter 5 can result in a multitude of related errors in subsequent code application, since many code requirements depend on the type of construction that is required for the building. The main purpose of Chapter 5 is to regulate the size of structures based on the specific hazards associated with their occupancy and the materials of which they are constructed. Chapter 5 also provides for adjustments to the allowable area and height based on the presence of fire protection system.

## SECTION 501 GENERAL

501.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter control the height and area of structures hereafter erected and additions to existing structures.

Chapter 5 is applicable to all new buildings as well as any existing structures that are to be enlarged. Allowable building height and building area are evaluated on the basis of

===== Page 0435 =====
occupancy classification, type of construction, location on the property relative to lot lines and other structures on the same lot, and the presence of an automatic sprinkler system throughout the building.

In the case of additions to existing buildings that are not separated by fire walls, for purposes of determining allowable building area and height, the designer and plan reviewer must evaluate the entire building, including the addition, as if it were a new structure. For instance, if an existing Type IIB building is to have an addition, the aggregate area of the modified building (existing plus the addition) must be within the limits established by Table 506.2 for the allowable area. Table 504.3 for the allowable height in meter, and Table 504.4 for the allowable number of stories above grade of a Type IIB building. The tables take into account area and height limitations for nonsprinklered or sprinklered buildings.

## SECTION 502 BUILDING ADDRESS

502.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be a minimum of 100 mm high with a minimum stroke width of 12.5 mm. Where required by the fire code official, address identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other approved sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be maintained.

The ability of fire, police and other emergency response personnel to identify both new and existing buildings is greatly aided by the proper placement of address identification. The size and color criteria are intended to aid visibility from the street. Where several structures are remotely located on a site or set back into a property, or at locations where multiple addresses are provided (e.g., strip malls) and the address is not readily visible from the public way, an approved method of identification will also be required, which will have characters posted in a location that will help in an emergency. The fire code official has the authority to require that address numbers be placed in all locations deemed necessary to properly identify the building by street address.
The primary concern is for emergency personnel to find the building without going through a lengthy search procedure. In the case of a strip mall, identification could be provided for the backs of buildings that face alleys or roads since the emergency response unit may often be directed to the back entrance. The address numbers must be maintained in a readily visible condition to provide for continuous identification. This would include the repainting of faded numbers or the trimming of trees or other vegetation that may be obscuring visibility of the address.

## SECTION 503 GENERAL BUILDING
HEIGHT AND AREA LIMITATIONS

503.1 General. Unless otherwise specifically modified in Chapter 4 and this chapter, building height, number of stories and building area shall not exceed the limits specified in Sections 504 and 506 based on the type of construction as determined by Section 602 and the occupancies as determined by Section 302 except as modified hereafter. Building height, number of stories and building area provisions shall be applied independently. For the purposes of determining area limitations, height limitations and type of construction, each portion of a building separated by one or more fire walls complying with Section 706 shall be considered to be a separate building.

The provisions for governing the height and area of buildings on the basis of occupancy classification and type of construction are established in this section. This section sends the user to Sections 504 and 506 to establish allowable heights, in meter and in stories, and allowable building area, based upon the type of construction. All buildings are subject to these limitations unless more specific code requirements for a building type provide for different height or area limitations. For instance:

Section 507 allows certain buildings to be unlimited in area due to lack of exposure, low hazard level, construction type, the presence of fire safety systems such as a sprinkler system, or a combination of these characteristics. Section 510 allows certain buildings with additional safeguards to adjust the heights and areas allowed by Sections 504 and 506. These are the only provisions that allow a mixture of construction types. In many cases, these provisions involve a distinct portion of the structure being used for parking.

Where more than one occupancy is present within one building, the provisions of Section 508 must be used in conjunction with Sections 504 and 506 to determine the appropriate construction type for the occupancies involved.

===== Page 0436 =====
Table 601 is used in conjunction with this chapter to determine acceptable risk and fire safety levels for a building. Classification by occupancy, in accordance with the descriptions in Chapter 3, can be considered as establishing the level of "risk" associated with the use of a building. The various construction types, described in Chapter 6 and Table 601, can be thought of as various levels of safety with regard to fire resistance. Table 504.3, Table 504.4 and Table 506.2 become a set of risk/safety matrices that sets a minimum level of safety (construction type) in accordance with the risk (the occupancy classification).

Fire walls are useful where a single building exceeds the allowable area limitation of Table 504.3, Table 504.4 and Table 506.2. When fire walls (see Section 706) are used in a structure, multiple buildings are created. Each building created by the fire walls would be permitted to have its own occupancy classification and type of construction. Since multiple buildings would be created, each building would be evaluated separately in accordance with the height and area limitations of this Chapter (see commentary, Section 706 and the definition for "Area, building" and "Height, building" in Section 202).

503.1.1 Special industrial occupancies. Buildings and structures designed to house special industrial processes that require large areas and unusual building heights to accommodate craneways or special machinery and equipment, including, among others, rolling mills; structural metal fabrication shops and foundries; or the production and distribution of electric, gas or steam power, shall be exempt from the building height, number of stories and building area limitations specified in Sections 504 and 506.

This section provides an exemption from the limits of Sections 504 and 506. The occupancies that may use this exemption are quite limited. The exemption is only applicable where large areas or unusual heights beyond that permitted by Table 504.3, Table 504.4 and Table 506.2 are necessary to accommodate the specific low-hazard or moderate-hazard manufacturing process.

It is the responsibility of the building official to determine where the application of this section is appropriate. The mere cost impact of the application of Table 504.3, Table 504.4 and Table 506.2 does not dictate an exemption. The building official, in assessing the proposed construction, may wish to compare what protection features are being proposed to those features of facilities similar to those described in this section.
503.1.2 Buildings on same lot. Two or more buildings on the same lot shall be regulated as separate buildings or shall be considered as portions of one building where the building height, number of stories of each building and the aggregate building area of the buildings are within the limitations specified in Sections 504 and 506. The provisions of this code applicable to the aggregate building shall be applicable to each building.

* Ordinarily, two buildings on the same lot are considered independently for compliance with the requirements of the code. Section 705.3 requires that when two buildings are on the same lot, an “imaginary” line is assumed between the buildings. This is used to determine the appropriate exterior wall fire-resistance ratings in Table 705.5, exterior wall requirements of Section 705, projection requirements of Section 705.2 and opening protective ratings and requirements set forth in Table 705.8 and Section 716 (also see the commentary for the definition of “Fire separation distance”). The primary purpose of Section 503.1.2 is to eliminate the application of the provisions of Section 705.3 where two separate buildings can be regulated as one larger building on the lot. In other words, if the two buildings under consideration were actually connected (making one building) and could meet the area and height limitations for one building based on construction type, the connecting interior wall would not be required to be rated. Therefore, it is inconsistent to require the protection of the facing exterior walls simply because there is not a physical connection between two portions of the same building.

For example, in Commentary Figure 503.1.2(1), Buildings A and B are being constructed on the same lot at the same time. If they are considered to be separate buildings, then the code requirements for exterior wall and opening protection, as well as projections and roof coverings, would apply to each building on the basis of the placement of an imaginary lot line between the two buildings.

Under this section, however, if they are considered to be one building for minimum type of construction purposes, then there is no need for protection of the exterior walls that face each other and the code requirements for exterior wall and openings do not apply to those walls. The facing walls would have to meet exterior wall requirements for the type of construction specified in Table 601 for exterior bearing walls only. If they were nonbearing walls, then the required fire-resistance rating would be zero.

===== Page 0437 =====
Although facing exterior walls between two buildings on the same lot are not subject to fire-resistance rating and opening size limitations by using this provision (except as previously indicated for bearing walls), the remainder of the exterior walls in both buildings must comply with any applicable exterior wall and opening provisions, including Table 601, Table 705.5, Table 705.8, Table 716.1(2) and Table 716.1(3). Three of the walls in Building A and three of the walls in Building B, therefore, would still be required to meet the applicable requirements, and the exemption would only apply to the two walls (one from each building) that face each other.

A special circumstance occurs where a large structure is divided by fire walls into two or more buildings. In such a case, the exception provided by Section 503.1.2 would not be applicable because it is likely that a fire wall has been established because the overall structure exceeds the allowable area for a single building. If the configuration of the buildings results in a court, an imaginary line should be established between the two buildings in order to determine exterior wall and opening protection requirements [see Commentary Figure 503.1.2(2)].

503.1.3 Type I construction. Buildings of Type I construction permitted to be of unlimited tabular building heights and areas are not subject to the special requirements that allow unlimited area buildings in Section 507 or unlimited building height in Sections 503.1.1 and 504.3 or increased building heights and areas for other types of construction.

Buildings of Type I construction permitted by Sections 504 and 506 to be of unlimited height and area do not need to comply with the provisions of Section 503.1.1 or the exception in Section 504.3, which allow height and area increases. While most buildings of Type I construction are permitted to be unlimited in area (see Section 506.2), they are not required to comply with any of the provisions in Section 507 for unlimited area buildings. The requirements in Section 507 address special circumstances that permit a building to be unlimited in area that would not otherwise be allowed to be unlimited in area. As there are no limitations to the size of these structures, the application of these Sections would be superfluous. These buildings may be of unlimited size based on their type of construction alone.

Conversely, high-rise buildings are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 403.3, and this section should not be construed to be a release from that requirement if a building fits the definition of "High-rise building."
Also note that a special industrial occupancy building, in accordance with Section 503.1.1, is permitted to be unlimited in height. However, this does not require the type of construction for the special industrial occupancy building to be Type I. Any type of construction is permitted for special industrial occupancy buildings. Similarly, noncombustible roof structures are permitted to be unlimited in height on all buildings, including those of Type I construction. See also Sections 504.1.1 and 506.1.1 for additional options for unlimited area buildings.

503.1.4 Occupied roofs. A roof level or portion thereof shall be permitted to be used as an occupied roof provided the occupancy of the roof is an occupancy that is permitted by Table 504.4 for the story immediately below the roof. The area of the occupied roofs shall not be included in the building area as regulated by Section 506. An occupied roof shall not be included in the building height or number of stories as regulated by Section 504, provided that the penthouses and other enclosed rooftop structures comply with Section 1511.

Exceptions:

1. The occupancy located on an occupied roof shall not be limited to the occupancies allowed on the story immediately below the roof where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 and occupant notification in accordance with Sections 907.5.2.1 and 907.5.2.3 is provided in the area of the occupied roof. Emergency voice/alarm communication system notification per Section 907.5.2.2 shall also be provided in the area of the occupied roof where such system is required elsewhere in the building.

2. Assembly occupancies shall be permitted on roofs of open parking spaces of Type I or Type II construction, in accordance with the exception to Section 903.2.1.6.

There is an increasing use of the roofs of buildings, both seasonally and year-round. This section provides direction to the building official in dealing with these uses.

The code defines a story as “that portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above.” An uncovered roof deck is clearly not a story, because there is no floor or roof above.

===== Page 0438 =====
This section also exempts the area of an occupied roof from being part of the area of the building. Building area is also a function of story. No story, no building area.

Occupancy is established in accordance with Section 302.1. It requires that the use of a roof be classified in the use group category it most nearly resembles. The code relies on occupancy classification to determine requirements. As an example, if a roof is used for gathering of people, it would be classified as Group A-3. If the roof is where patrons are drinking and dining, it would be classified as Group A-2. An occupied roof outside a private office would be classified as Group B. It is based on the use and the relative hazard of the use just as spaces in a building are classified.

Section 503.1.4 then establishes which occupancies can be located on the roof of a building. If the building is not provided with fire sprinklers, the use cannot be located on the roof unless it is permitted on the story directly below. For example, an occupied roof used for the gathering of people on top of an office building of Type VB construction without fire sprinklers would be limited to the roof of a one-story building.

Rooftop structures on the occupied roof, such as penthouses, tanks, cooling towers, towers, spires, domes and cupulas, and mechanical equipment screens, do not create a story even where the adjacent roof area is used for other purposes. Section 1511.2 establishes what can be considered part of a penthouse. The penthouse area would also include elevators, their associated landing area and stairway bulkheads where they provide access to the roof level. If a designer starts to add items such as shade structures, kiosks, storage areas or bathrooms on the roof, this will be considered a story (see Section 503.1.4.1).

Under Exception 1, if the building is provided with fire sprinklers, there is no limitation regarding the occupancy or occupancies located on the roof. The fire sprinklers will provide protection from the story below the occupied roof. The notification requirement, including an emergency voice/alarm communication system where applicable, is provided to warn occupants on the rooftop of events in the building below them.

Exception 2 correlates this section with the exception to Section 903.2.1.6, which allows assembly occupancies on the roof of Type I or II open parking garages without sprinklers on all the floors below.
Section 503.1.4 works in conjunction with other code provisions that address both occupied roofs (Section 903.2.1.6, Assembly occupancies on roofs, and Section 1006.3, Egress from stories or occupied roofs) and outdoor areas (Section 1004.5, Outdoor areas). Access for persons with disabilities must be provided in accordance with Chapter 11.

503.1.4.1 Enclosures over occupied roof areas. Elements or structures enclosing the occupied roof areas shall not extend more than 1200 mm above the surface of the occupied roof.

Exception: Penthouses constructed in accordance with Section 1511.2 and towers, domes, spires and cupolas constructed in accordance with Section 1511.5.

From a fire-fighting perspective, an occupied roof area functions as a story even though it technically does not meet the definition of a story. Section 503.1.4.1 sets limits on the height of any barriers or obstacles around the occupied roof area, so that it does not function as a story. The exception is intended to allow penthouses, towers, domes, spires, and cupolas that comply with Section 1511 to exceed the 1200 mm height limit. Note that other rooftop structures in Section 1511, such as mechanical equipment screens and "bulkheads," are intentionally not included in the exception. The specified rooftop structures are generally limited in extent as related to the occupied roof, so their walls were not judged to be a major obstacle.

## SECTION 504 BUILDING HEIGHT AND NUMBER OF STORIES

504.1 General. The height, in meter, and the number of stories of a building shall be determined based on the type of construction, occupancy classification and whether there is an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout the building.

Exception: The building height of one-story aircraft hangars, aircraft paint hangars and buildings used for the manufacturing of aircraft shall not be limited where the building is provided with an automatic sprinkler system or automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Chapter 9 and is entirely surrounded by public ways or yards not less in width than one and one-half times the building height.

This Section is a fairly straightforward statement regarding those attributes of a building that impact the allowable height of a building. These attributes are: the type of

===== Page 0439 =====
construction, as described in Chapter 6; the occupancy classification of the building, as described in Chapter 3; and the presence, or lack thereof, of an automatic sprinkler system for the entire building. This Section is simply a charging statement for what is to come. The actual limitations on numbers of stories and meter come later in Sections 504.3 and 504.4. The exception permits fully suppressed aircraft hangars to exceed the height limits of Tables 504.3 and 504.4 as long as they have the specified open area surrounding the building. The exception is necessary to accommodate the size of large aircraft within the building, and the hazard is mitigated by the requirement for suppression and the very large open space provided by the yards and public ways. While the code refers to fire-extinguishing requirements in Chapter 9, the detailed suppression requirements for aircraft hangars are specified in Section 412.3.6. Aircraft paint hangars (see Section 412.5) that are Group H-2 may be unlimited in area as well, under certain conditions (see commentary, Section 507.10).

504.1.1 Unlimited area buildings. The height of unlimited area buildings shall be designed in accordance with Section 507.

Section 507 allows certain buildings to be unlimited in area due to lack of exposure, low hazard level, construction type, the presence of fire safety systems or a combination of these characteristics. This section is a pointer to Section 507 for determination of the allowable height of buildings when the building is being built, using the specific provisions of the unlimited area buildings option. See also Sections 503.1.3 for unlimited area buildings of Type I construction.

504.1.2 Special provisions. The special provisions of Section 510 permit the use of special conditions that are exempt from, or modify, the specific requirements of this chapter regarding the allowable heights of buildings based on the occupancy classification and type of construction, provided the special condition complies with the provisions specified in Section 510.

Section 510 allows certain buildings with additional safeguards to adjust the height in meter and stories allowed by Sections 504.3 and 504.4. Many of the provisions allow a mixture of construction types, and most involve a distinct portion of the structure being used for parking (see also Section 506.1.2).

504.2 Mixed occupancy. In a building containing mixed occupancies in accordance with Section 508, no individual occupancy shall exceed the height and number of story limits specified in this section for the applicable occupancies.
This Section is a pointer to Section 508 regarding how to apply the height limitations of Sections 504.3 and 504.4 when a building contains two or more occupancies. The actual allowable height of the building depends on the specific provisions of the applicable portion of Section 508. To be considered are whether the occupancies are separated or nonseparated and whether one or more of the occupancies is accessible to a main occupancy.

For example: A two-story, nonsprinklered building of Type VB construction is proposed to have a restaurant on the first floor and an office business on the second floor. Per Table 504.4, the number of stories for Group A-2 (restaurants) is limited to one story and for Group B (offices) to two stories. The building could not be built without a separation between the floors because the nonseparated option must comply with the most restrictive height limitation. Options that could be investigated include equipping the building with sprinklers, separating the first and second floors or choosing a higher construction type.

504.3 Height in meter. The maximum height, in meters, of a building shall not exceed the limits specified in Table 504.3.

Exception: Towers, spires, steeples and other rooftop structures shall be constructed of materials consistent with the required type of construction of the building except where other construction is permitted by Section 1511.2.4. Such structures shall not be used for habitation or storage. The structures shall be unlimited in height where of noncombustible materials and shall not extend more than 6 m above the allowable building height where of combustible materials (see Chapter 15 for additional requirements).

Table 504.3 provides limitations on the height, in meter, of a building based on the occupancy classification, the type of construction and whether the building is equipped throughout with a sprinkler system. The height in meter is the distance from grade plane to the average height of the highest roof surface. See the commentary in Section 202 on “Height, building.”

Example: An architect is planning an office building to be constructed of Type VB construction without a sprinkler system. What is the maximum height, in meter, above grade plane to which this building can be constructed?

Answer: The building can be constructed to a maximum height above grade plane of 12 m.

===== Page 0440 =====
The building is Occupancy Classification B. Therefore, to find this number, one would go to the row with Occupancy Classifications A, B, E, F, M, S, and U and find the row aligned with "NS." Following to the right on that row, the number 40 can be found under the column TYPE V and B. If a taller building is desired, the options to increase the allowable building height would be to either sprinkler the building or choose a higher type of construction.

The exception relates to certain roof structures that may exceed the height limitations of Table 504.3 in accordance with this section and Chapter 15. Structures that are used for habitation or storage must be considered to be an additional story and must be included when considering the height limitations in stories in Table 504.4 as well as the height limits in meter in Table 504.3. Please note that Section 1511, Roof-top Structures, contains additional restrictions for structures of a certain size or use. Roof structures must be consistent with the type of construction for the supporting building and, in some cases, must have ratings equivalent to those required for exterior walls. Section 1511.2.4 contains exceptions for penthouse-type structures, mechanical equipment enclosures and screens when not in proximity to a property line. The height for noncombustible roof structures is unlimited. Combustible roof structures are permitted to extend up to 6 m above the allowable height set in Table 504.3.

See Table 504.3
The use of Table 504.3 is explained in the example in Section 504.3.

The height provisions for Types IV-A, IV-B and IV-C were added after analysis of performance of mass timber systems, including the fire test series, in relation to the performance of the previously adopted construction types.

Type IV-A construction requires a 3-hour structural frame, approximating the fire-resistance rating requirements of Type I-A construction per Table 601. However, the heights proposed for Type IV-A construction (81 m maximum building height) are less than those permitted for Type I-A construction (unlimited height permitted) due to the short history of tall mass timber construction and the combustibility of the building material. The limit to IV-A building height also helps to ensure the reliability of the fire protection systems. The maximum height of 81 m is well suited to a single standpipe pressure zone of 2050 KPa maximum which can be achieved by readily available equipment and fire apparatus thus avoiding the need for more complicated fire suppression strategies. It is recommended the fire department be consulted to ensure they can adequately supply the needed pressure. Type IV-B construction heights are the same as those for Type I-B construction because it approximates the same fire-resistance rating requirements. However, in accordance with Section 403.2.1.1, Item 2, many occupancy use groups are permitted to be of Type I-B construction but with fire-resistance ratings of Type IIA construction (1-hour structural frame). This reduction does not apply to Type IV-B construction. In essence, the fire-resistance rating requirement for a Type IV-B building will be 2 hours due to the short history of mass timber construction and the combustibility of the structural frame.

Type IV-C construction also requires a 2-hour structural frame, with interior wall and ceiling surfaces of mass timber elements permitted to be fully exposed (except elements used for occupancy and incidental use separations). Due to the exposure of combustible surfaces in Type IV-C construction and lack of additional test data, no additional height over Type IV-HT in terms of meters are permitted for Type IV-C construction, although additional height in terms of stories is permitted for Type IV-C over Type IV-HT (see Table 504.4).

It is noteworthy that no additional height, over what is permitted for Type IV-HT, was also proposed for Types IV-A, IV-B and IV-C that are nonsprinklered. This was a conservative approach that is cognizant of the combustible nature of these new construction types.

Regarding the Notes:
In Table 504.3, "UL" indicates where the building height in meter is unlimited; however, it is important to also look at the limits for height in stories and building area in Tables 504.4 and 506.2, respectively. The notes also contain some very important information for compliance with the code. In particular, "S" indicates an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, which is a sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13 (as opposed to NFPA 13R or 13D), with some exempt locations as specified. "S13R" refers to buildings equipped with a sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2, which is a sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13R, with some exempt locations as specified. NFPA 13R is a standard for installation of sprinkler systems in low-rise residential and Group I-1 occupancies. NFPA 13 contains some provisions that are more rigorous than NFPA 13R.

Therefore, a residential building with a sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 (NFPA 13) has a higher limitation for

===== Page 0441 =====
height than a residential building with sprinklers installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 (NFPA 13R).

S13D (NFPA 13D) applies to Group R-3 and R-4. Condition 1 and townhouse occupancies only. There are differences in allowed height in between buildings protected by a 13D system versus a 13R system.

Note a: Chapter 4 and 5 contain provisions for special detailed requirements based on use and occupancy, some of which include exceptions to these height limitations. An example is open parking garages, Section 406.5. Open parking garages have their own area and height limitations stated in Table 406.5.4. Similarly, this chapter contains some provisions that are exceptions to the height limitations contained in this section. An example is Section 507, which contains different height limits for unlimited area buildings.

Note b: Section 903.2 specifies thresholds for occupancies that require sprinklers, regardless of height and area or type of construction. For instance, a fire area containing a Group A-2 occupancy greater than 465 m², or an occupant load greater than 100, or one that is located above the level of exit discharge must be equipped with a sprinkler system, as well as all of the intervening floors from the level of exit discharge to the floor containing the A-2 fire area. If there were floors above this occupancy that were not sprinkled, then the building would be designed based on "NS," Nonsprinklered, because the building is not equipped throughout with a sprinkler system.

Note c: This is a specific mention of an item in Section 903.2 as already mentioned in Note b. All new construction in Group H occupancies is required to be equipped with a sprinkler system. Therefore the "NS" row will never apply.

Note d: There are some applications where "NS" values are given, but do not apply to new construction. They might, however, apply to existing construction, applying the evaluation provisions of SBC 901.
Notes e, f, g, and h: Similar to the discussion on Note c, there are occupancies that are required to have sprinkler systems installed, and therefore the only time the values in the "NS" row might apply are for existing buildings, where SBC 901 applies. Also, in the case of Note g, there are areas where the code does not require sprinklers in Group I-4. In those cases, the "NS" row would be the appropriate row to use in determining height limitations.
504.4 Number of stories. The maximum number of stories above grade plane of a building shall not exceed the limits specified in Table 504.4.
 \( ^{*} \)  Table 504.4 provides height limitations, in stories, of a building based on the occupancy classification, the type of construction and whether the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system. The height is in number of stories above grade plane. See Section 202 for the definition of "Story above grade plane."

Example: An architect is planning an office building to be constructed of Type VB construction without a sprinkler system. What is the maximum height, in stories, above grade plane to which this building can be constructed?

Answer: The building can be constructed to a maximum height of two stories above grade plane. The building is Occupancy Classification B. To find this number, one would go to the row with Occupancy Classification "B" and find the row aligned, with "NS." Following to the right on that row, the number 2 can be found under the column TYPE V and B. If a taller building is desired, the options to increase the allowable building height would be to either sprinkler the building or choose a higher type of construction.

See Table 504.4

The use of Table 504.4 is explained in the example in Section 504.4. See the commentary provided for Table 504.3 regarding the nomenclature and notes.

The primary method of proposing number of stories for Types IV-A, IV-B and IV-C is comparing the performance of these new construction types to that of existing construction types, and with appropriate factors, creating story allowances based on existing allowances for other types of construction.

While there were comparisons made between Type IV-A and Type I-A construction, there was hesitancy to greatly increase the heights of tall wood buildings due to the short history of tall mass timber construction and the combustibility of the building material. As such, rather than base Type IV-A construction heights on correlations to Type I-A construction, the proposals were to use the new heights for Type I-B construction and provide a reasonable increase in height over Type IV-B. No Table exceptions are made for Group H occupancies due to the greater hazards associated in those occupancies.

A strong correlation was determined to exist between Type I-B construction and the new Type IV-B construction. As such, the new heights for Type IV-B construction are based on those that exist for Type I-B construction with some exceptions for occupancies such as F-1, some H, I-1 and S-1, where the proposed

===== Page 0442 =====
height for Type IV-B construction is less than that allowed for Type I-B construction. Also, due to the emphasis on fire sprinkler protection for these new construction types, the height of nonsprinklered occupancies is unchanged from that which exists for Type IV-HT construction.

For IV-C construction, while the height in meter is the same as for Type IV-HT construction, the 2-hour fire-resistance rating requirement for Type IV-C construction, compared to no rating requirement for Type IV-HT, allows for more stories of Type IV-C than permitted in Type IV-HT for several occupancies. The determination is that the increased level of compartmentation provided by Type IV-C fire-resistance rating requirements is sufficient to permit the increased building fuel load expected from the additional stories.

## SECTION 505 MEZZANINES AND EQUIPMENT PLATFORMS

505.1 General. Mezzanines shall comply with Section 505.2. Equipment platforms shall comply with Section 505.3.

Special provisions are established for two types of elevated floor areas: mezzanines and equipment platforms. Each of the elements has its own unique characteristics, requirements and allowances. Section 505.2 addresses mezzanines. Special provisions for equipment platforms are located in Section 505.3. Where both are present in the same space, Section 505.2.1 clarifies the limits to aggregate area.

505.2 Mezzanines. A mezzanine or mezzanines in compliance with Section 505.2 shall be considered a portion of the story below. Such mezzanines shall not contribute to either the building area or number of stories as regulated by Section 503.1. The area of the mezzanine shall be included in determining the fire area. The clear height above and below the mezzanine floor construction shall be not less than 2.1 m.

Although mezzanines provide an additional or intermediate useable floor level in a building, they are not considered an additional story where they comply with the requirements of Section 505.2. Building height and area limitations are intended to offset the inherent fire hazard associated with specific occupancies and with materials and features of a specific construction type. Because of a mezzanine's restricted size and its required openness to the room or space in which it is located, a mezzanine is not considered to contribute significantly to a building's inherent fire hazard. Therefore, the area of a mezzanine is not considered when applying the provisions of Section 506.2 for building area limitations, and mezzanines are not considered in determining the height in stories of a building as regulated by Table 504.4. The occupant and fuel loads of the mezzanine should be taken into consideration, however, when determining the necessity for fire protection systems. As such, the area of the mezzanine is to be included in the calculation of the size of the fire area for sprinkler thresholds (see commentary to definition of "Fire area," Section 202).

This section does not include any special requirements for the construction of a mezzanine or for fire resistance ratings; therefore, the mezzanine is to be constructed of materials consistent with the construction type of the building. Required fire-resistance ratings are determined on the basis of Table 601 for the appropriate construction type.

Mezzanines are required to have a ceiling height of not less than 2.1 m, and the ceiling height below the mezzanine must also be not less than 2.1 m. Even habitable rooms located in mezzanines may have a ceiling height of 2.1 m, in accordance with Exception 3 to Section 1207.2.

505.2.1 Area limitation. The aggregate area of a mezzanine or mezzanines within a room shall be not greater than one-third of the floor area of that room or space in which they are located. The enclosed portion of a room shall not be included in a determination of the floor area of the room in which the mezzanine is located. In determining the allowable mezzanine area, the area of the mezzanine shall not be included in the floor area of the room.

## Exceptions:

1. The aggregate area of mezzanines in buildings and structures of Type I or II construction for special industrial occupancies in accordance with Section 503.1.1 shall be not greater than two-thirds of the floor area of the room.

2. The aggregate area of mezzanines in buildings and structures of Type I or II construction shall be not greater than one-half of the floor area of the room in buildings and structures equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and an approved emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

3. The aggregate area of a mezzanine within a dwelling unit that is located in a building equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 shall

===== Page 0443 =====
not be greater than one-half of the floor area of the room, provided that:

4. Except for enclosed closets and bathrooms, the mezzanine shall be open to the room in which such mezzanine is located;

5. The opening to the room shall be unobstructed except for walls not more than 1050 mm in height, columns and posts; and.

6. Exceptions to Section 505.2.3 shall not be permitted.

So as not to contribute significantly to a building's inherent fire hazard, a mezzanine is restricted to a maximum of one-third of the area of the room with which it shares a common atmosphere. The area may consist of multiple mezzanines open to the same room at the same or different levels, provided that the aggregate area does not exceed the one-third limitation (this determination is based on the gross floor area of the mezzanines). If the area limitation is exceeded, the provisions of this Section do not apply, the mezzanine level is considered an additional story and the area of the mezzanine would be included in building area.

In determining the allowable area of the mezzanine, any enclosed spaces in the room in which the mezzanine is contained are not to be included in calculating the room size. Although the mezzanine area is included in the calculation of fire area size, it is not included in the area of the room when computing the allowable mezzanine area. For example, a room contains 465 m², 45 m² of which are enclosed and not part of the common atmosphere with the mezzanine. A mezzanine may be provided in the room such that the area of the mezzanine is not more than 140 m² [465 m² - 45 m² = 420 × 1/3 = 140 m²]. The mezzanine level must be open unless one of the exceptions is applicable. Even if the mezzanine is enclosed, the allowable area of the mezzanine is always determined by assuming the space of the mezzanine is open to the room in which it is located.

Exception 1 applies to special industrial occupancies (see commentary, Section 503.1.1). Special industrial occupancies, based on provisions of Section 503.1.1, inherently have a very low fire hazard. Therefore, mezzanines in such occupancies located in buildings of Type I or II construction are permitted to constitute up to two-thirds of the area of the room in which they are located. The limitation on construction types further reduces the fire hazard associated with such occupancies.
Exception 2 provides additional allowable area for mezzanines in Type I or II construction in any occupancy, provided sprinklers and an approved emergency voice/alarm communication system are installed. The tradeoff for additional area for installation of a sprinkler system recognizes the additional time that sprinklers provide for occupant evacuation. The emergency voice/alarm communication system is also seen as a necessary feature of this tradeoff as it enables occupants of a building to become aware of a fire that could start in a remote part of the mezzanine, prompting evacuation before smoke spread could cause a problem for occupants. Experience has shown that occupants react more readily when given voice instructions than when given a general alarm. Exception 3 provides an exception to the one-third area limit for mezzanines located within dwelling units. Where such dwelling units are located within a building that is protected by either a NFPA 13 or 13R automatic sprinkler system, the mezzanine area can be as much as 50 percent of the area of the room in which it is located. Enclosed spaces of such mezzanines are limited to bathrooms and closets. The opening to the room below must truly be open. Enclosure is essentially limited to that needed to provide guards complying with Section 1015. Use of this exception in a dwelling unit means that any of the exceptions found in Section 505.2.3 cannot be used. Most of the Section 505.2.3 exceptions address how open the mezzanine is to the room below. This exception spells out very specific limits for the openness.

505.2.1.1 Aggregate area of mezzanines and equipment platforms. Where a room contains both a mezzanine and an equipment platform, the aggregate area of the two raised floor levels shall be not greater than two thirds of the floor area of that room or space in which they are located. The area of the mezzanine shall not exceed the area determined in accordance with Section 505.2.1.

Equipment platforms, as defined in Section 202, are not considered mezzanines (see Section 505.3 for provisions addressing equipment platforms). Where one or more mezzanines and one or more equipment platforms are located within the same room, the aggregate area of such elevated spaces cannot exceed more than two-thirds of the floor area of the room in which they are located. In addition, the maximum floor area for any portion determined to be a mezzanine is limited based on the provisions of this section.

===== Page 0444 =====
505.2.2 Means of egress. The means of egress for mezzanines shall comply with the applicable provisions of Chapter 10.

A mezzanine can be likened to a room or space when considering means of egress (see Section 1006.2). As with rooms, if the occupant load of the mezzanine exceeds the limitation of Table 1006.2.1 for the specific use of the space, at least two independent means of egress must be provided for the mezzanine. For example, if a mezzanine containing office areas (Group B) has an occupant load exceeding 49, a second means of egress from the mezzanine is required. Additionally, if a mezzanine has one means of egress and it is by means of an exit access stairway to the floor below, the common path of egress travel distance from the most remote point on the mezzanine to the bottom of the stairway may not exceed 23 m in accordance with Section 1006.2.1 [where the occupant load is 30 or less, a common path of egress travel is allowed to increase to 30 m]. If the travel distance to the bottom of the exit access stairway exceeds the limits of Table 1006.2.1, then a second means of egress must be provided from the mezzanine. This assumes that at the bottom of the stairway there are at least two separate travel paths available that lead to at least two exits. If the room below has only one exit, the travel distance from the most remote point on the mezzanine is measured to the exit access door of the room or other point where two separate paths become available.

Because mezzanines that comply with Section 505.2 are considered a portion of the story in which they are located, the exit access stairway leading from it is not required to be enclosed. Per Section 1019.2, stairways that are contained within a single story are not required to be enclosed.

Where two exit access stairways are required, they are to be located remote from each other in accordance with Section 1007.1.1. The measurement for separation is to the top of the closest riser of the two open exit access stairways (see Section 1007.1.1.1, Item 2), and the separation must be maintained for the entire length of the open exit access stairways as they move down to the room below (see Section 1007.1.3).

The occupant load of the mezzanine is added to the room or space below, and the required means of egress width for that room is determined accordingly (see Section 1004.2.2). For example, if a room (Group B) has an occupant load of 45 and a mezzanine (also Group B) has an occupant load of 15, the total occupant load for the space served is 60. Therefore, the room must have two exit access doors or exits in accordance with Table 1006.2.1. The mezzanine itself, however, needs only one means of egress, provided that the common path of egress travel provisions of Table 1006.2.1 are met.

Alternatively, if exit access travel distance cannot be met, an exit providing direct access to the outside, an exterior exit stairway or an enclosed interior exit stairway can be utilized to provide the required means of egress from the mezzanine.

The requirements for accessible means of egress are specifically addressed in Section 1009.1, Exception 1. If two means of egress are required from the mezzanine and an accessible route is required to the mezzanine, then at least one accessible means of egress must be provided from the mezzanine (see Section 1009.1). While exit access stairways within the same story cannot serve as part of an accessible means of egress, exit access stairways from the mezzanine can serve as part of an accessible means of egress (see Section 1009.3.1). If an accessible route is not required to the mezzanine (see Sections 1104.3 and 1104.4) or the mezzanine is not required to be accessible (see Section 1103.2), then accessible means of egress are not required.

505.2.3 Openness. A mezzanine shall be open and unobstructed to the room in which such mezzanine is located except for walls not more than 1 m in height, columns and posts.

Exceptions:

1. Mezzanines or portions thereof are not required to be open to the room in which the mezzanines are located, provided that the occupant load of the aggregate area of the enclosed space is not greater than 10.

2. A mezzanine having two or more exits or access to exits is not required to be open to the room in which the mezzanine is located.

3. Mezzanines or portions thereof are not required to be open to the room in which the mezzanines are located, provided that the aggregate floor area of the enclosed space is not greater than 10 percent of the mezzanine area.

4. In industrial facilities, mezzanines used for control equipment are permitted to be glazed on all sides.

5. In occupancies other than Groups H and I, which are no more than two stories above grade plane and equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, a mezzanine having two or more exits or

===== Page 0445 =====
access to exits shall not be required to be open to the room in which the mezzanine is located.

A mezzanine presents a unique fire threat to the occupant. If a mezzanine is closed off from the larger room, an undetected fire could develop such that it would jeopardize or eliminate the opportunity for occupant escape. The initial requirement is for the mezzanine to be open to the room below so that the mezzanine will be in the same atmosphere as the room below. This should make fire recognition quicker. The 1 m height for the perimeter walls is to allow walls that meet the height requirements for guards (see Section 1015.3). The columns and posts should be limited to those that support the roof or floor above the mezzanine.

The exceptions address situations where the hazard is reduced. Exception 1 would allow for a small mezzanine, or a small portion of a larger mezzanine, to be enclosed where the occupant load for that enclosed area is 10 or less. Occupant load is calculated in accordance with Section 1004.1 for the use or function of the mezzanine space. Similarly, Exception 3 permits the enclosure of a limited portion of a mezzanine.

Exception 2 permits enclosure of the mezzanine based on at least two means of egress being provided. Since mezzanines are elevated, means of egress is typically by either open exit access stairways or enclosed interior exit stairways.

Exception 4 addresses industrial facilities, where enclosure may be necessary for noise reduction or atmospheric control.

Exception 5 permits enclosure of a mezzanine in a building that is fully protected by a sprinkler system and limited to two stories. While Exception 5 has more restrictions than Exception 2, the allowances for enclosure of the mezzanine are essentially the same where there are two means of egress provided.

505.3 Equipment platforms. Equipment platforms in buildings shall not be considered as a portion of the floor below. Such equipment platforms shall not contribute to either the building area or the number of stories as regulated by Section 503.1. The area of the equipment platform shall not be included in determining the fire area in accordance with Section 903. Equipment platforms shall not be a part of any mezzanine and such platforms and the walkways, stairways, alternating tread devices and ladders providing access to an equipment platform shall not serve as a part of the means of egress from the building.

* "Equipment platform" is defined in Section 202 as an unoccupied, elevated platform used exclusively for supporting mechanical systems or industrial process equipment and providing access to that equipment. If an elevated platform does not meet all the conditions of this definition, then it must be considered either a mezzanine or another story.

Equipment platforms are treated as part of the equipment they support (within the limitations of the subSections to this section) and do not contribute in any way to the area of the building, the number of stories, the area of any mezzanine or any fire area. However, if equipment platforms are located in the same room as a mezzanine, the aggregate area of the platforms and mezzanines is limited by Sections 505.2.1.1 and 505.3.1.

The definition of “Equipment platform” includes the associated elevated walkways, stairs, alternating tread devices and ladders necessary to access the platform. Any egress elements that serve an equipment platform are not permitted to serve as a means of egress for occupants from other areas of the building. Because they are not used for general means of egress, the elements used to access these platforms could be something other than a stairway or ramp. For example, a permanent ladder could be used to access an equipment platform.

505.3.1 Area limitation. The aggregate area of all equipment platforms within a room shall be not greater than two-thirds of the area of the room in which they are located. Where an equipment platform is located in the same room as a mezzanine, the area of the mezzanine shall be determined by Section 505.2.1 and the combined aggregate area of the equipment platforms and mezzanines shall be not greater than two-thirds of the room in which they are located. The area of the mezzanine shall not exceed the area determined according to Section 505.2.1.

In determining the allowable area of an equipment platform, neither the enclosed spaces of the room in which the equipment platform is located nor the area of the equipment platform itself is to be included in calculating the room size. Whereas mezzanines are limited to one-third of the area of the room in which they are located, equipment platforms are permitted to be two-thirds of the area of the room. Whereas the area of mezzanines is included in the calculation of the fire area (see Section 505.1), the area of equipment platforms is not included as part of the fire area. The area of mezzanines and equipment platforms, however, is summed when they are in the same room, and the aggregate area is limited to two-thirds of the area of the room.

===== Page 0446 =====
505.3.2 Automatic sprinkler system. Where located in a building that is required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system, equipment platforms shall be fully protected by sprinklers above and below the platform, where required by the standards referenced in Section 903.3.

In buildings or spaces that are required to be protected with an automatic fire sprinkler system, sprinkler protection above and below the equipment platform is needed so the equipment platform will not obstruct sprinkler coverage or delay sprinkler activation if a fire develops below the platform. This section should not be construed to require sprinkler protection for equipment platforms where such a system is not otherwise required.

505.3.3 Guards. Equipment platforms shall have guards where required by Section 1015.2.

Guards are required for equipment platforms in the same manner that they are required at open walking surfaces in other parts of the building, and are subject to the same requirements for height, design load and configuration. In areas where electrical, mechanical and plumbing systems or equipment are accessed and used, Exception 3 to Section 1015.4 allows guard designs that would let spheres up to 525 mm to pass through openings.

## SECTION 506 BUILDING AREA

506.1 General. The floor area of a building shall be determined based on the type of construction, occupancy classification, whether there is an automatic sprinkler system installed throughout the building and the amount of building frontage on public way or open space.

This section is a fairly straightforward statement regarding which attributes of a building impact the allowable area of a building. These attributes are the type of construction, as described in Chapter 6; the occupancy classification of the building, as described in Chapter 3; the presence, or lack thereof, of an automatic sprinkler system for the entire building; and the amount of the building that has frontage on an open space or public way. This section is simply a charging statement for what is to come. The limitations on numbers of stories and meter are found in Sections 504.3 and 504.4.

506.1.1 Unlimited area buildings. Unlimited area buildings shall be designed in accordance with Section 507.

Section 507 allows certain buildings to be unlimited in area due to lack of exposure, low hazard level, construction type, the presence of fire safety systems or a combination of these characteristics. Under these specific provisions, Section 506.2 does not apply unless referenced. See also Section 503.1.3 for additional options for unlimited area buildings.

506.1.2 Special provisions. The special provisions of Section 510 permit the use of special conditions that are exempt from, or modify, the specific requirements of this chapter regarding the allowable areas of buildings based on the occupancy classification and type of construction, provided the special condition complies with the provisions specified in Section 510.

Section 510 allows certain buildings with additional safeguards to adjust the heights and areas allowed by Section 506.2. Many of the provisions allow a mixture of construction types, and most involve a distinct portion of the structure being used for parking.

506.1.3 Basements. Basements need not be included in the total allowable floor area of a building provided the total area of such basements does not exceed the area permitted for a one-story above grade plane building.

Assuming the basement is the same footprint as the building, the area of a single basement is not required to be counted as part of the total building area when evaluating total allowable area in accordance with Section 506.2. Determining the maximum area for the basement can include the frontage increase in Section 506.3. Where there are multiple basements, the area of the basements is combined in order to determine if the basements will be considered to count toward the limits for the total permitted building area. Therefore, if the allowable area of a single-story building is 4645 m² in accordance with Sections 506.2 and 506.3, the total aggregate area of all stories below grade plane must not exceed 4645 m². If the aggregate area exceeds that allowed for a single-story building, the basement levels must be counted as contributing to the total allowable area for the building.

506.1.3.1 Basement requirements. It shall be permissible to construct one or more basement floors covering the entire area of the land, provided that all technical, architectural, and structural requirements related to public safety, ventilation systems, groundwater drainage, and sewage are met, in accordance with the relevant executive regulations and environmental requirements

506.2 Allowable area determination. The allowable area of a building shall be determined in accordance with the applicable provisions of Sections 506.2.1, 506.2.2 and Section 506.3

The process for determining the allowable area of a building is provided in Sections 506.2.1.

===== Page 0447 =====
506.2.2 and 506.3. At the core of the requirements is Table 506.2, which provides tabular area values that are plugged into the applicable equations in Sections 506.2.1 and 506.2.2. The tabular values are established based on the type of construction, the occupancy classification and whether the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system. The allowable area values are then determined based on these tabular values, the number of stories and the amount of frontage the building has on open space or a public way.

See Table 506.2
The use of Table 506.2 is explained in the example in Section 506.2. Regarding the Notes a through h, see the commentary provided on the notes for Table 504.3. Note i allows nonsprinklered greenhouses that fall into a Group U classification to have a maximum area of 835 m². If a larger size is desired, the note directs the code user to Appendix C.

Significant updates are made to Table 506.2 to address new construction Types IV-A, IV-B and IV-C. Although these new construction types are introduced with fire-resistance rating requirements that approximate Types I-A and I-B construction, due to the combustibility and relatively short history of mass timber, these new construction types are provided with limitations to area, unlike most occupancies of Type I construction that are allowed unlimited area. Also, buildings of Type I construction do not require any restriction on the size per floor as building height increases, but with Type IV construction, since there is an upper limit to the total building area, the average allowable area per floor is decreased as the building height in stories increase. This results in decreased horizontal travel distance to exit stairs and decreased distance to emergency situations for responding emergency personnel in taller Type IV buildings. It is worth noting that conservatism is achieved as there is no increased areas permitted in the NS rows for Types IV-A, IV-B and IV-C beyond what is allowed for Type IV-HT, even with the added fire resistance and/or noncombustible protection requirements.

506.2.1 Single-occupancy buildings. The allowable area of each story of a single-occupancy building shall be determined in accordance with Equation 5-1:

 \[ A_{a}=[A_{t}+(NS*I_{f})] \quad (5-1) \]

where:

 \( A_{a} \)  = Allowable area (square meters).

 \( A_{t} \)  = Tabular allowable area factor (NS, S1, or S13R, S13D or SM value, as applicable) in accordance with Table 506.2.
NS = Tabular allowable area factor in accordance with Table 506.2 for nonsprinklered building (regardless of whether the building is sprinkled).  \( I_{f} \)  = Area factor increase due to frontage (percent) as calculated in accordance with Section 506.3.

The allowable area per story of a single occupancy building with a maximum of three stories above grade shall be determined by Equation 5-1. The total allowable area of a single occupancy building more than three stories above grade plane shall be determined in accordance with Equation 5-2:

 \[ A_{a}=[A_{t}+(NS*I_{f})]x S_{a} \quad (5-2) \]

where:
 \( A_{a} \)  = Allowable area (square meters).

 \( A_{t} \)  = Tabular allowable area factor (NS, S13R, S13D or SM value, as applicable) in accordance with Table 506.2.

NS = Tabular allowable area factor in accordance with Table 506.2 for a nonsprinklered building (regardless of whether the building is sprinkled).  \( I_{f} \)  = Area factor increase due to frontage (percent) as calculated in accordance with Section 506.3.

 \( S_{a}=3 \)  where the actual number of stories above grade plane exceeds three, or

 \( S_{a}=4 \)  where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2.

The actual area of any individual floor shall not exceed the allowable area per Equation 5-1.

This Section gives the basic formulas for determining the allowable area for single-occupancy buildings. Equation 5-1 is used to determine the allowable area of each floor in buildings up to three stories, while Equation 5-2 determines the total allowable area of a building greater than three stories. Basically, the allowable area per floor of a single-occupancy building is based on the tabular area of Table 506.2 added to the product of the tabular area for a nonsprinklered building and the frontage increase factor per Section 506.3.3. In buildings taller than three stories, that value is multiplied by three to find the total allowable area for the building or multiplied by four if the building has an NFPA 13R sprinkler system. Finally, no individual story can be greater than the allowable area of a one-story building, as illustrated in Examples 4 and 5.

Example 1: A one-story motel, planned to be Type IIIB construction. As required by the code, the building will be equipped throughout with an NFPA 13R sprinkler system. The building has less than 25 percent of its perimeter facing a public way or open space. What is the allowable area?

Answer: The allowable area for this building is 1485 m².

===== Page 0448 =====
Explanation: The occupancy classification for a motel is R-1. Under the column Type III, Column B, in the row for R-1, S13R, the value for At is 1485 m², and NS = 1485 m².

In Equation 5-1, If = 0. (See commentary on Section 506.3 for a detailed explanation of If) Therefore, in Equation 5-1:  \( A_{a} = 1485 + (1485 \times 0) = 1485 \, m^{2} \) .

Observe that, for residential occupancies, there is no advantage to having a sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13R versus having no sprinkler system at all. However, for this same building, the allowable area would be  \( 5950 \, m^{2} \)  if an NFPA 13 sprinkler system were installed.

Example 2: A one-story retail store building is proposed to be built 1950 m² in area. Like Example 1, the building has only 25 percent of its perimeter facing a public way or open space. What is the minimum type of construction allowed for this building? If an NFPA 13 sprinkler system was to be installed, what would be the minimum type of construction allowed?

Answer: The minimum type of construction for this building without a sprinkler system would be Type IIA. With an NFPA 13 sprinkler system, the minimum type of construction would be Type VB.

The area factor increase due to frontage, If = 0. (For discussion on this factor, see Section 506.3.) Therefore, Equation 5-1 becomes  \( A_{a} = A_{t} \) . That is, the allowable area equals the tabular area when there is no increase for frontage. The occupancy classification for a retail store is M. Therefore, entering Table 506.2 for occupancy classification M, in the row labeled "NS" for nonsprinklered buildings, note that the tabular area for Type IIA construction is 1997 m², which is greater than the proposed area of 1950 m². Therefore, Type IIA construction would be allowed.

If the building was provided with an NFPA 13 sprinkler system, the construction type could be VB. Again, entering the Table at occupancy classification M, but in the row "SI" for one-story sprinkled buildings, note that the tabular area for Type VB construction is 3344 m², which is greater than the proposed 1950 m².

Example 3: What is the allowable area of each floor in a three-story office building, Type IIB construction, with no increase for frontage?

Answer: The maximum area of each story is 2137 m². For Equation 5-1,  \( A_{t}=2137 \) , NS = 2137 and  \( I_{f}=0 \) . Therefore:  \( A_{a}=A_{t}+(NS \times I_{f})=2137+(2137 \times 0)=2137 \)  per story. The total building area would be 2137 m² times three stories or 6410 m².
Example 4: What is the total allowable area of a five-story office building constructed like the building in Example 3?

Answer: Total allowable area is 6410 m². For Equation 5-2, all values are the same as in Example 3 except total area is limited by Sa, which is 3. Therefore:  \( A_{a} = [A_{t} + (NS \times I_{f})] \times Sa = [2137 + (2137 \times 0)] \times 3 = 6410 \, m^{2} \) . Although the maximum area of any single story is 2137 m², the average area of all five stories must be 1282 m² to be within the total allowable area of the code. The area of each story can vary as long as the total area does not exceed 6410 m². For example: the first story could be 2137 m², the second story 1765 m², and the top three stories could be 836 m² each for a total of 6410 m².

Example 5: What is the allowable area of a four-story apartment building, Type IIIB construction, equipped throughout with NFPA 13R sprinklers, with no allowable frontage increase?

Answer: Total allowable area is 5946 m². Maximum area of each story is 1486 m². Using Equation 5-2:  \( A_{t} = 1486 \, m^{2} \) ,  \( I_{f} = 0 \) , NS = 1486 m². Sa = 4. Therefore:

 \[ A_{a}=[1486+(1486\times0)]\times4=5946m^{2} \]

The code increases the maximum number of stories as the base for the building equipped with an NFPA 13R system to four rather than three because NFPA 13R is specifically written to effectively deal with buildings up to a maximum of four stories. Note that this is a limitation, and that an NFPA 13 system would be required for a building more than four stories in height.

506.2.2 Mixed-occupancy buildings. The allowable area of each story of a mixed-occupancy building shall be determined in accordance with the applicable provisions of, Section 508.3.2 for nonseparated occupancies and Section 508.4.2 for separated occupancies.

For buildings with more than three stories above grade plane, the total building area shall be such that the aggregate sum of the ratios of the actual area of each story divided by the allowable area of such stories, determined in accordance with Equation 5-3 based on the applicable provisions of Section 508.1, shall not exceed three.

 \[ A_{a}=\left[A_{t}+\left(NS\times I_{f}\right)\right] \quad (5-3) \]

 \( A_{a} \)  = Allowable area (square meter).

 \( A_{t} \)  = Tabular allowable area factor (NS, S13R, S13D or SM value, as applicable) in accordance with Table 506.2.

NS = Tabular allowable area factor in accordance with Table 506.2 for a nonsprinklered building, regardless of whether the building is sprinklered.

===== Page 0449 =====
If = Area factor increase due to frontage (percent) as calculated in accordance with Section 506.3.

Exception: For buildings designed as separated occupancies under Section 508.4 and equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2, the total building area shall be such that the aggregate sum of the ratios of the actual area of each story divided by the allowable area of such stories determined in accordance with Equation 5-3 based on the applicable provisions of Section 508.1, shall not exceed four.

The allowable area of a building with more than one occupancy is dependent on the option used in Section 508 for multiple occupancies. The commentary to Section 508 addresses this in some detail. The code provides three basic options for mixed occupancies: accessory occupancies, nonseparated occupancies and separated occupancies. The availability of the options depends on the area of each story desired for each different occupancy and the relationship of one occupancy to the other. For mixed-occupancy buildings up to three stories above grade, the allowable area for each floor is determined by either Section 508.3.2 for nonseparated occupancies or Section 508.4.2 for separated occupancies.

The exception increases the maximum number of stories as the base from three to four for a building equipped with an NFPA 13R sprinkler system because NFPA 13R is specifically written to effectively deal with buildings up to a maximum of four stories. Note that this is a limitation, and that an NFPA 13 sprinkler system would be required for a building more than four stories in height.

Example 1: A single-story business office of 2135 m² contains a lunchroom that is 185 m² in area. The main occupancy is Group B and the accessory occupancy is Group A-2. Since the Group A-2 occupancy has a floor area of less than 10 percent of the overall floor area of the single story, this can be viewed as an accessory occupancy and there is no fire separation requirement between the Group A-2 and B occupancies. For purposes of evaluating the area limitation, the building is evaluated solely as Group B.

In addition, the accessory occupancy, in this case the Group A-2 occupancy, cannot have an area greater than that allowed for a nonsprinklered A-2 occupancy. For this building (assuming nonsprinklered), the construction type would need to be not less than a Type IV (Types I, II and IIIA could also be used). The A-2 accessory occupancy could be as large as 550 square meters regardless of construction type, per Table 506.2.
In contrast to the accessory occupancy provisions for this example, the fundamental concept for nonseparated occupancies is that the allowable building areas are based on the most restrictive requirements of each of the occupancies in the mixed-occupancy building.

Example 2: A single-story Type IIB building contains both Group B and M occupancies and is being evaluated under the “Nonseparated occupancies” provisions of Section 508.3. The Group B portion is 95 m² in area while the Group M portion is 930 m² in area. The building does not have a sprinkler system and does not qualify for any frontage increase. With the exception of Type I construction, the area limitation of Section 503.1 is more restrictive for Group M than for Group B.

Therefore, for purposes of evaluating the area limitation of Table 506.2, the building is evaluated solely as Group M.

Group M:  \( A_{a} = 1160 + 0 = 1160 \, m^{2} \)

Since the total area is 1022 m², the building can be constructed as a Type IIB building.

Another method to determine compliance is the following equation:

• Actual area (Group M)/Allowable area (Group M) < 1.0

1022/1160 = 0.88, which is < 1.0; therefore, OK

The separated occupancies concept requires the different occupancies to be separated in accordance with Table 508.4. The sum of the ratios of the actual floor area of each separated occupancy contained therein, as compared to the area allowed per story by Section 506.2, must not exceed 1.0 (see Section 508.4.2). Using this same example, where the Group B and M occupancies are viewed as separated occupancies, the ratio requirement for allowed area is as follows:

 \[ \frac{Actual area(B)}{Allowable area(B)}+\frac{Actual area of(M)}{Allowable area of(M)}\leq1 \]

0.04 + 0.8 = 0.84 < 1.0; therefore OK

Once a mixed-occupancy building exceeds three stories in height, the maximum allowed area for the total building is set at three times the sum of the ratios. Example 3 illustrates the application of the total area limitations for each building and shows the variety of ways in which the provisions of Section 508 can be used in the design of the building.

Example 3: Sprinklered, four-story above grade Type IIB building, no frontage increase. First story: Group B occupancy:

1858 m²

Group M occupancy:

===== Page 0450 =====
2323 m²
Second story: Group A-3 occupancy:
372 m²
Group B occupancy:
3809 m²
Third story: Group B occupancy:
1394 m²
Group S-1 occupancy:
1394 m²
Group F-1 occupancy:
1394 m²
Fourth story: Group B occupancy:
929 m²
Group S-2 occupancy:
3252 m²
The first story does not qualify as an accessory or nonseparated occupancy. As separated occupancies, the ratio on the story is 0.96 [(1858/6412) + (2323/3485)].
The second story is larger than that permitted for a Group A-3 occupancy; however, since the Group A-3 occupancy is less than 10 percent of the area of the second story, it qualifies as an accessory occupancy if subsidiary to the Group B occupancy. The ratio on the story is 0.65 (4182/6412).

The first story does not qualify as an accessory or nonseparated occupancy. As separated occupancies, the ratio on the story is 0.96 [(1858/6412) + (2323/3485)].

The second story is larger than that permitted for a Group A-3 occupancy; however, since the Group A-3 occupancy is less than 10 percent of the area of the second story, it qualifies as an accessory occupancy if subsidiary to the Group B occupancy. The ratio on the story is 0.65 (4182/6412).

The third story qualifies as a nonseparated occupancy since the allowable area per story for the most restrictive occupancy [Group F-1; 4320 m²] is larger than the actual area on any individual story. The ratio of the floor is 0.97 (4180/4320).

The fourth floor qualifies as a nonseparated occupancy since the allowable area per floor for the most restrictive occupancy [Group B; 6410 m²] is larger than the actual area on any individual story. The ratio of the story is 0.65 (4180/6410).

The aggregate sum of the ratios is 3.23 (0.96 + 0.65 + 0.97 + 0.65). Since the aggregate sum of the ratios exceeds 3.0, Type IIB construction would not be permitted without further modification. In addition, this building could not be constructed as suggested without additional separations. Occupancy Groups M and F1 cannot be located above the third story of a nonseparated building based on Table 504.4. However, even if the third and fourth stories were separated, the building fails the sum of the ratios analysis. The only solution is likely to go to a higher type of construction.

506.2.2.1 Group H-2 or H-3 mixed occupancies. For a building containing Group H-2 or H-3 occupancies, the allowable area shall be determined in accordance with Section 508.4.2, with the sprinkler system increase applicable only to the portions of the building not classified as Group H-2 or H-3.
Section 506.2.2.1 allows Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies to be placed in a building where the increase for an automatic sprinkler system given in Table 506.2 would be applied, but with the limitation that the increase for sprinklers would not apply to the Group H-2 or H-3 areas. These Group H-2 or H-3 areas would be required to be separated from the other uses, given that Sections 508.2.4, 508.3.3 and 508.4.4 specifically require separation of these occupancies from other occupancies. The required separation would be as given for separated occupancies in Section 508.4.4, and the allowable area would be based on the sum of the ratios of the actual area of each occupancy to the allowable area per story (see commentary, Section 508.4.2). In the case of the Group H-2 or H-3 areas, the allowable area per story would be based on the tabular area given in Table 506.2 for Group H-2 or H-3 as applicable. This would have the effect of limiting the allowable areas of the entire building when a Group H-2 or H-3 area is being included.

Example: The construction of a single-story, Group F-1 factory using Type IIIB construction, with a 325 m² Group H-2 area. An automatic sprinkler system will be used throughout the building. The building does not qualify for any frontage increase.

Applying Equation 5-1 to each occupancy:

• Allowable area of Group F-1 = 4460 m²

• Allowable area of Group H-2 = 650 m²

• Allowable area of the Group F-1 area with an NFPA 13 automatic sprinkler system = 4460 m². So, without a Group H-2 area, the building could be 4460 m² in area.

Actual area of F-1 + Actual area of H-2
Allowable area of F-1 + Allowable area of H-2 ≤ 1

• Actual area of F-1 + 325 ≤ 1
4460

Solving this equation for the actual area of Group F-1, it is determined that the maximum area of Group F-1 that could be allowed would now be 2223 m². Thus, while the high hazard is allowed, it does restrict the size of the host occupancy.

506.3 Frontage increase. Every building shall adjoin or have access to a public way to receive an area factor increase based on frontage. Area factor increase shall be determined in accordance with Sections 506.3.1 through 506.3.3.

The allowable area of a building is allowed to be increased where it has a certain amount of frontage on streets (public ways) or open spaces, since this provides access to the structure by fire service personnel, a temporary refuge area for occupants as they leave the

===== Page 0451 =====
building in a fire emergency and a reduced exposure to and from adjacent structures. Sections 506.3.1 through 506.3.3 describe how this increase for frontage is determined.

506.3.1 Minimum percentage of perimeter. To qualify for an area factor increase based on frontage, a building shall have not less than 25 percent of its perimeter on a public way or open space. Such open space shall be either on the same lot or dedicated for public use and shall be accessed from a street or approved fire lane.

There is no requirement in the code that buildings have at least 25 percent of their perimeter on a public way or open space. However, in order to qualify for an area increase, a building must have more than 25 percent of its perimeter on a public way or open space having a minimum width of at least 6 m (see Section 506.3.2). When the calculations are done, the maximum percent increase for a fully open perimeter (full frontage the entire perimeter fronts on a public way or open space) is 75 percent. Width is measured at right angles to the perimeter walls as set forth in Section 506.3.2, but open frontage is not the same as fire separation distance. Fire separation distance, as defined in Section 202, is measured to the centerline of public ways or to an imaginary line between buildings on the same lot. Open space can include the total width of the public way as well as the total open space between buildings on the same lot. "Public way" is a defined term.

If a structure is divided into two or more buildings by fire walls complying with Section 706, the area modifications allowed by Section 506 must be determined based on each separate building within the structure. This especially comes into play in determining increases allowable based on frontage. The fire wall is essentially the perimeter wall for that side of the building and must be included in the total perimeter in calculating the percentage of perimeter on a public way or open space. Since there is another building on the other side of the fire wall, this portion of the perimeter is not considered fronting on a public way or yard [see Commentary Figure 506.3.1(1)].

This section requires that an open space that is not a public way be on the same lot or dedicated for public use, and it must have access from a street or an approved fire lane in order to contribute to the frontage increase. The requirement that the open space be on the same lot is so that the owner or the jurisdiction can control the space that is assumed to be open for purposes of the area increase. One cannot encumber a neighbor's property with a
requirement that the space will always remain unoccupied.

Any part of the perimeter that is not accessible to the fire department by means of a street or fire lane cannot be considered open for the purposes of this section. For instance, if the back side of a building on a narrow lot cannot be reached by means of a fire lane on one side of the building (and there is no alley or street at the back), that portion of the perimeter is not considered open for purposes of frontage increase, even if there is actual open space exceeding 6 m in width. See Commentary Figure 506.3.1(2) as an illustration of this limitation.

This section does not require that a fire lane or street extend immediately adjacent to every portion of the perimeter that is considered open for purposes of the increase. Rather, access by a fire lane must be provided up to the open side such that fire department personnel can approach the side and pull hoses across the open area to fight a fire, and no corner of the building will impede the use of hoses and equipment on that side of the building. The following examples demonstrate this point.

Example 1: In Commentary Figure 506.3.1(2), the south and east side of the building facing the street can be considered open perimeter (frontage). The north side of the building cannot be considered open perimeter for purposes of the increase, since it is not accessible from the street or a fire lane. Even though the 6 m wide yard can be included in open frontage because it does not provide a fire lane to the rear of the building, the 30 m yard cannot be included.

Example 2: In Commentary Figure 506.3.1(3), all sides of the building are considered open perimeter (frontage) for purposes of the increase. Access up to each side of the building is provided by means of a fire lane or street.

Section 503 of SBC 801 specifies that access roads extend to within 46 m of all portions of the exterior walls of a building. However, there are exceptions that would permit the omission of such roads under certain circumstances. One such exception is for buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system where the fire code official is permitted to extend the 46 m limit.

SBC 801 also stipulates that the access roads must be at least 6 m in unobstructed width, although it also gives the building official authority to require greater widths if necessary for effective firefighting operations. The type of surface necessary for the approved fire lane is determined by the building official with input from the fire department, but the road must be capable of supporting the imposed loads of fire

===== Page 0452 =====
apparatus and be surfaced so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities.

506.3.2 Minimum frontage distance. To qualify for an area factor increase based on frontage, the public way or open space adjacent to the building perimeter shall have a minimum distance of 6 m measured at right angles from the building face to any of the following:

1 The closest interior lot line.

2 The entire width of a street, alley or public way.

3 The exterior face of an adjacent building on the same property.

The frontage increase shall be based on the smallest public way or open space that is 6 m or greater, and the percentage of building perimeter having a minimum 6 m public way or open space.

The amount of area increase is determined by using the smallest available width of the open space on the perimeter of the building not less than 6000 mm. The percentage of open space is calculated by dividing the length of perimeter that adjoins 6000 mm or more of open space and dividing it by the total perimeter of the building.

Example: In Commentary Figure 506.3.2, three sides of the building adjoin an open space of 6 m or more, which satisfies the 25-percent minimum percentage requirement in Section 506.3.1. The smallest width of open space is 6 m, and therefore the frontage increase factor would be selected from the column "6 to less than 7.5 m," depending on the percentage of building perimeter with 6 m or more of open space.

Typically, where multiple buildings are located on the same lot, an imaginary lot line must be established somewhere between the buildings in order to determine the fire separation distance. However, for determining frontage area increase, the minimum distance of the space between buildings is not dependent on the fire separation distance. For frontage increase, open space between buildings on the same lot permits the entire distance between the buildings to be used, not solely the fire separation distance. Similarly, the entire width of a public way is used for frontage increase and not just the distance to the centerline of the public way. Such measurements are to be taken at right angles from the building.

506.3.3 Amount of increase. The area factor increase based on frontage shall be determined in accordance with Table 506.3.3.

This Section takes the Equation used in SBC 201 editions prior to 2024 for frontage area increase and puts it into a Table for easier calculation. The factor increase is determined by calculating the percentage of building perimeter with 6 m or more of open space as measured perpendicular to the building, then finding the smallest width of open space of 6 m or more adjoining the building. Apply these two values to find the factor increase in the table. Interpolation within the Table is permitted:

Example 1: Refer to Commentary Figure 506.3.2:

Note that in the commentary prior to 2024, 6 m is the value used as required by Section 506.3.2. The length of building perimeter adjoining a public way or open space of at least 6 m is 150 m (60 + 30 + 60). Dividing this length by the total perimeter of 180 m gives the result of approximately 83 percent of the building having open space. Therefore, using the column in Table 506.3.3 for open space width of 6 to less than 7.5 m and the row for 75 to 100 percent of open space, the frontage area increase allowed for this building is 0.5.

Example 2: The building shown on Commentary Figure 506.3.2 is proposed to be a mercantile occupancy, Type VB construction, one story, equipped throughout with an NFPA 13 sprinkler system. The allowable area using Equation 5-1:

 \[ \begin{aligned}A_{a}=A_{t}+(NS\times I_{f})=3345+\\ (836\times0.5)=3763m^{2}.\end{aligned} \]

See Table 506.3.3.
Table 506.3.3 is used for determining frontage area increase for buildings that have at least 25 percent of their perimeter adjoining a public way or open space of at least 6 m, measured perpendicular from the building (see Sections 506.3.1 and 506.3.2).

506.3.3.1 Section 507 buildings. Where a building meets the requirements of Section 507, as applicable, except for compliance with the minimum 18 m public way or yard requirement, the area factor increase based on frontage shall be determined in accordance with Table 506.3.3.1.

Buildings that do not meet the 18 m public way or yard requirement to qualify for unlimited area in Section 507 but comply with all other requirements are allowed an area increase based on Table 506.3.3.1. The factor increase is determined in the same manner as for Table 506.3.3.

See Table 506.3.3.1.

See the commentary to Section 506.3.3.1 for application of this table.

## SECTION 507 UNLIMITED AREA BUILDINGS

507.1 General. The area of buildings of the occupancies and configurations specified in Sections 507.1 through 507.13 shall not be limited.

===== Page 0453 =====
Basements not more than one story below grade plane shall be permitted.

This Section addresses circumstances under which a building would be allowed to be constructed with unlimited building area. Depending on the height (in stories) of the structure and the occupancy classification, the code presents different circumstances that would allow an unlimited area building. There is a common thread among the requirements for these facilities:

Except for the option in Section 507.3, the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system.

2 The building is surrounded by increased open space, usually 18 m in width (see also Section 507.2.1).

3 The buildings are limited to one or two stories above grade plane, with a single-story basement.

4 The building only houses low-hazard or moderate-hazard occupancies.

Historically, structures constructed under the provisions for unlimited area buildings have performed quite well with regard to fire and life safety. In general, only those occupancies and configurations that are specifically identified in Section 507 are subject to the unlimited area allowance.

507.1.1 Accessory occupancies. Accessory occupancies shall be permitted in unlimited area buildings in accordance with the provisions of Section 508.2, otherwise the requirements of Sections 507.3 through 507.13 shall be applied, where applicable.

This section clarifies that the accessory use provisions of Section 508.2 can also be applied to unlimited area buildings. This allows uses not specifically addressed in Sections 507.3 through 507.13 to be located in any of these buildings, provided they meet the requirements of accessory occupancies according to Section 508.2. The provision is distinct from Section 507.4.1, which addresses Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies in unlimited area buildings under Section 507.4. The provisions of Section 507.4.1 are for additional primary uses in these unlimited area buildings. A large office building could have an employee cafeteria, which is a Group A-2 occupancy, as an accessory, provided it was less than 10 percent of the floor area and didn't exceed the allowable area of Sections 503 and 506. Such accessory space would not need to be separated as required for the larger spaces allowed under Section 507.4.1.

507.2 Measurement of open spaces. Where Sections 507.3 through 507.13 require buildings to be surrounded and adjoined by public ways and yards, those open spaces shall be determined as follows:

1 Yards shall be measured from the building perimeter in all directions to the closest interior lot lines or to the exterior face of an opposing building located on the same lot, as applicable.

2 Where the building fronts on a public way, the entire width of the public way shall be used.

In all cases, the open space can occur within public ways surrounding the site, within yards provided on the lot between the building and the lot lines, or a combination of yards and public ways. Where a yard is used to achieve the open space, it must be on the same lot as the building receiving the benefit. With respect to the 18 m, the code specifies that the entire width of the public way can be included. (Fire separation distance, which is a different requirement, requires measurement to the centerline of the public way.) Unlike the street frontage increase in Section 506.3.2, the open space must be provided in all directions around the perimeter of the building, not just measured at right angles to the building (see Commentary Figure 507.2). Two unlimited area buildings on the same lot must be separated by 18 m [or 12 m if Section 507.2.1 is used] unless they are treated as a single building under the provisions of Section 503.1.2.

The open space located on the private property does not need to be dedicated to the public or publicly owned, but can be the location of parking, landscaping, roadways and other minor accessory features (tanks, generators, trash dumpster enclosures) (see IBC Interpretation No. 20-03). However, the yard cannot be occupied by any exterior use that is essentially a continuation of use of the building. For example, many big box retailers will have an adjoining lawn and garden merchandise area; or a lumber supply area that is only partially enclosed by walls, fencing and roof covering. This type of use would need to be considered part of the unlimited area building, and the 18 m of open space provided beyond this area (see IBC Interpretation No. 03-05).

The open areas serve two key roles: separation of these buildings from other buildings and ample space on all sides for firefighting operations.

Please note that Section 507.2.1 permits a reduction in the open space in exchange for increased wall and opening protection for those unlimited area buildings allowed by Sections 507.3, 507.4, 507.5, 507.6 and 507.12.

===== Page 0454 =====
507.2.1 Reduced open space. The public ways or yards of 18 m in width required in Sections 507.3, 507.4, 507.5, 507.6 and 507.12 shall be permitted to be reduced to not less than 12 m in width provided that the following requirements are met:

1 The reduced width shall not be allowed for more than 75 percent of the perimeter of the building.

2 The exterior walls facing the reduced width shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 3 hours.

3 Openings in the exterior walls facing the reduced width shall have opening protectives with a fire protection rating of not less than 3 hours.

The minimum width of the open space surrounding those unlimited area buildings specified in Sections 507.3, 507.4, 507.5, 507.6 and 507.12 may be reduced if the exterior walls are protected with minimum 3-hour fire-resistance-rated construction and the openings are protected with 3-hour rated assemblies. All three conditions of this section must be met in order to reduce the open space to a minimum of 12 m. The criteria and standards for wall assemblies and opening protection are contained in Chapter 7. Wherever the open space is less than 18 m, then the 3-hour rating would be required. The corners of buildings are likely to be situated such that the 3-hour protection will need to be extended as much as 6 m along a secondary wall because such walls may have 18 m of open space in one direction, but they may not have 18 m in all directions. See Commentary Figure 507.2.1.

507.3 Nonsprinklered, one-story buildings. The area of a Group F-2 or S-2 building no more than one story in height shall not be limited where the building is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 18 m in width.

By definition, occupancies of Groups F-2 and S-2 are not permitted to contain significant amounts of combustible materials (see Sections 306.3 and 311.3); therefore, because the fire load of the contents is lower, the hazard is lower. The type of construction is not restricted, and sprinklers are not required for unlimited area buildings containing Group F-2 and S-2 occupancies, provided the building is no more than one story above grade plane. See the commentary in Section 507.2 regarding the required open space. Section 507.2.1 can be applied to buildings built under this section. Where all the requirements of this Section are met, this specific provision for a nonsprinklered, unlimited area building overrules the general provision of Section 903.2.10 that would otherwise limit the area of an open parking garage, a Group S-2 occupancy, without sprinklers.

507.4 Sprinklered, one-story buildings. The area of a Group A-4 building not more than one story above grade plane of other than Type V construction, or the area of a Group B, F, M or S building no more than one story above grade plane of any construction type, shall not be limited where the building is provided with an automatic sprinkler system throughout in accordance with 903.3.1.1 and is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 18 m in width.

Exceptions:

1. Buildings and structures of Type I or II construction for rack storage facilities that do not have access by the public shall not be limited in height, provided that such buildings conform to the requirements of Sections 507.4 and 903.3.1.1 and Chapter 32 of SBC 801.

2. The automatic sprinkler system shall not be required in areas occupied for indoor participant sports, such as tennis, skating, swimming and equestrian activities in occupancies in Group A-4, provided that both of the following criteria are met:

3. Exit doors directly to the outside are provided for occupants of the participant sports areas.

3.1. The building is equipped with a fire alarm system with manual fire alarm boxes installed in accordance with Section 907.

3.2. An automatic sprinkler system is provided in storage rooms, press boxes, concession booths or other spaces ancillary to the sport activity space.

Because of their excellent record in controlling fires, the installation of a sprinkler system throughout single-story buildings of the specified groups, individually or in combination, permits such buildings to be unlimited in area (IBC Interpretation No. 44-06). This also applies to two-story, above-grade-plane buildings of these groups, with the exception of Group A-4 (see Section 507.5). See the commentary in Section 507.2 regarding the required open space. Section 507.2.1 can be applied to buildings built under Section 507.4. The life safety hazards in buildings of these occupancies, because of the typical activities of the occupants and their level of awareness, are considered low enough that larger building areas and increased fire loads can be tolerated. For Groups B, F, M and S, this Section may be applied to buildings of all

===== Page 0455 =====
construction types and is not limited to noncombustible construction. For indoor arenas and other Group A-4 buildings, the unlimited area provision can be applied to buildings of Types I, II, III and IV construction only. This reflects the size of the occupant load in these types of facilities. The sprinkler system is required to be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 13 (see Section 903.3.1.1). The height in meter of the unlimited area building cannot exceed the limits established in Section 504.3 for the occupancy and type of construction. See Section 507.9 for similar buildings that include Group H-5 facilities.

Exception 1 specifically permits Type I and II buildings with rack storage to be single-story, but unlimited in the height in meter, if they are surrounded by 18 m of open space, do not permit access by the public, have an NFPA 13 sprinkler system and comply with SBC 801 Chapter 32. These standards contain provisions for storage configuration, in-rack sprinkler coverage and system requirements that offset the hazard introduced by increased height.

Exception 2 eliminates providing a sprinkler system in certain areas of unlimited area Group A-4 occupancies where a lack of fuel loading and excessive ceiling heights would reduce the need for, and effectiveness of, the system. Group A-4 occupancies frequently have indoor participant sports areas such as tennis courts, skating rinks, swimming pools, baseball fields, basketball courts and equestrian arenas. The spectator seating is usually situated around the perimeter of the sports field or area. These types of indoor recreation areas often require very large, open areas with such high ceilings that the installation of an automatic sprinkler system in the immediate participant sport area would be ineffective. The potential for significant fire involvement in such an area is generally quite low because of the low fuel load; therefore, sprinkler coverage is unnecessary for the playing field in most of these buildings. These areas are, therefore, exempt from the suppression requirement of this section, provided that the conditions regarding exiting and the required fire alarm system are met. The use of the sports field or area for other uses, such as a weekend crafts fair or other activity not specifically listed, would be in violation of the exception and should not be permitted. When an indoor arena or sports facility is built without suppression in the participant sport area, occupants of the playing field or participant sport area must be able to exit the building directly from the playing area, without having to pass through other parts of the building. This eliminates the hazard of having to pass through higher fuel load areas such as locker rooms or concession areas. The building must also be equipped with a manual alarm system that complies with Section 907. This manual alarm system provides an additional and acceptable level of life safety in spite of the omission of sprinklers over the playing field area. This exception only applies to Group A-4 occupancies that are contained within an unlimited area building.

Omission of sprinkler coverage is permitted in the unlimited area building for the participant sport area only. All other areas are required to be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system. This includes all other rooms and spaces in the building, such as the spectator seating areas, locker rooms, restaurants, lounges, shops, arcades, skyboxes and storage areas.

507.4.1 Mixed occupancy buildings with Groups A-1 and A-2. Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies of other than Type V construction shall be permitted within mixed occupancy buildings of unlimited area complying with Section 507.4, provided that the following criteria are met:

1 Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies are separated from other occupancies as required for separated occupancies in Section 508.4.4 with no reduction allowed in the fire-resistance rating of the separation based upon the installation of an automatic sprinkler system.

2 Each area of the portions of the building used for Group A-1 or A-2 occupancies shall not exceed the maximum allowable area permitted for such occupancies in Section 503.1.

3 Exit doors from Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies shall discharge directly to the exterior of the building.

This section allows Group A-1 and A-2 occupancies in mixed occupancy, single-story unlimited area buildings under limited conditions. These are considered as additional primary use occupancies allowed in buildings regulated by Section 507.4. For accessory uses, see the commentary for Section 507.1.1. A typical example of a practical application of this would be the construction of a strip mall that is mainly for retail stores, but might contain a restaurant or a movie theater, or both. Group A-1 or A-2 buildings would not be permitted as stand-alone unlimited area buildings. Similar to the requirement in Section 507.4 for Group A-4 buildings, unlimited area buildings that contain a Group A-1 or A-2 occupancy are not permitted to be built of Type V construction.

===== Page 0456 =====
507.5 Two-story buildings. The area of a Group B, F, M or S building not more than two stories above grade plane shall not be limited where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 18 m in width.

The rationale for allowing unlimited area two-story buildings in these four occupancy groups is the same as for one-story structures of these uses. The type of construction is not restricted. The number of stories are those above grade plane. Group A is not included in the occupancies that can be located within a two-story, unlimited area building because of the hazards associated with higher occupant loads. Even though limited Group A occupancies can be located in one story unlimited area buildings, such occupancies cannot be located on either story of a two-story, unlimited area building unless they are accessory occupancies (see Section 507.1.1). The provisions of Section 507.4.1 do not apply to two-story buildings. See the commentary to Section 507.2 regarding the required open space. Section 507.2.1 can be applied to buildings built under Section 507.5.

507.6 Group A-3 buildings of Type II construction. The area of a Group A-3 building no more than one story above grade plane, used as a community hall, wedding hall, exhibition hall, gymnasium, lecture hall, indoor swimming pool or tennis court of Type II construction, shall not be limited provided that the following criteria are met:

1 The building shall not have a stage other than a platform.

2 The building shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

3 The building shall be surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 18 m in width.

Assembly buildings pose a greater risk in general, primarily because of their relatively large occupant loads and the density of such loads; therefore, the unlimited area provisions are more restrictive for assembly occupancies. Limited types of Group A-3 buildings are allowed as unlimited area buildings, provided that each is limited to one story above grade plane. In the case of the Group A-3 occupancies listed, the construction classifications allowed to be unlimited area include Type II, which are noncombustible structures, and Type III and IV (see Section 507.7), which are combustible structures. The types of Group A-3 occupancies listed mosques, dance halls, community halls, exhibition halls, gymnasiums, lecture halls, indoor swimming pools and tennis courts are typically well-lit, open spaces, containing a low fuel load. Libraries and museums are excluded, as they generally have a higher fuel load, as are bowling alleys and pool halls that are often poorly lit and have higher levels of activity. The dance halls included in Group A-3 are not to be confused with halls, which are Group A-2 occupancies.

The Group A-3 buildings listed in this section must have 18 m of open space surrounding the structure. Similar to the occupancies referenced in Sections 507.3 and 507.4, a sprinkler system must be provided and is required to be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 13. Group A-3 buildings are further restricted, however, in that the building must not have a stage (other than a platform). These requirements aid in the exiting of the building in an emergency. See the commentary to Section 507.2 regarding the required open space. Section 507.2.1 can be applied to buildings built under Section 507.6.

507.7 Group A-3 buildings of Type III and IV construction. The area of a Group A-3 building of Type III or IV construction, with not more than one story above grade plane and used as a community hall, wedding hall, exhibition hall, gymnasium, lecture hall, indoor swimming pool or tennis court, shall not be limited provided that the following criteria are met:

1 The building shall not have a stage other than a platform.

2 The building shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

3 The assembly floor shall be located at or within 525 mm of street or grade level and all exits are provided with ramps complying with Section 1012 to the street or grade level.

4 The building shall be surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 18 m in width.

The requirements for Group A-3 buildings of Type III or IV construction are similar to the provisions for buildings of Type II construction. Due to the permitted use of combustible materials in Group A-3 buildings of Type III and IV construction, these buildings are further restricted in that the assembly floor level of the building must not be higher than 525 mm above street or grade level. These requirements aid in the exiting of the building occupants in an emergency. In order to further assist in the evacuation of the building in an emergency, assembly floors that are not at grade level must be provided with ramps (i.e., no stairs) that lead

===== Page 0457 =====
to grade level. Note that the 525 mm height limitation for the assembly floor would prohibit the installation of a mezzanine, a balcony or most raised-floor surfaces in the building. See the commentary to Section 507.2 regarding the required open space. Please note that Section 507.2.1 cannot be applied to buildings built under Section 507.7.

507.8 Group H-2, H-3 and H-4 occupancies. Group H-2, H-3 and H-4 occupancies shall be permitted in unlimited area buildings containing Group F or S occupancies in accordance with Sections 507.4 and 507.5 and the provisions of Sections 507.8.1 through 507.8.4.

Group F and S buildings, single story, with an NFPA 13 sprinkler and an 18 m open perimeter can include some high-hazard areas. This section sets forth limits for Group H-2, H-3 and H-4 occupancies in these unlimited area buildings. Group F facilities often inherently contain a certain amount of Group H-2, H-3 and H-4 occupancies where hazardous materials are needed for the industrial processes. Similarly, it is reasonable to provide for limited quantities of hazardous material storage in a storage (Group S) occupancy. See the commentary to Section 507.2 regarding the required open space. Please note that Section 507.2.1 cannot be applied to buildings built under Section 507.8.

507.8.1 Allowable area. The aggregate floor area of Group H occupancies located in an unlimited area building shall not exceed 10 percent of the area of the building or the area limitations for the Group H occupancies as specified in Section 506 based on the perimeter of each Group H floor area that fronts on a public way or open space.

Multiple high-hazard (Group H-2, H-3 and H-4) occupancies are permitted within a manufacturing or storage building constructed under the unlimited area building provisions; however, the aggregate floor area of all such occupancies cannot be more than 10 percent of the floor area of the entire building. It is important that the higher hazards be limited in amount in order to maintain the high degree of fire and life safety anticipated in an unlimited area building. In addition, the aggregate floor area of Group H occupancies cannot exceed area limitations established by Section 506 with any permitted frontage increases as calculated by Section 506.3.

507.8.1.1 Located within the building. The aggregate floor area of Group H occupancies not located at the perimeter of the building shall not exceed 25 percent of the area limitations for the Group H occupancies as specified in Section 506.
For those Group H occupancies that are not located at the perimeter of the building, an additional limitation is placed on their allowable area. If the high-hazard occupancy is surrounded on all sides by an unlimited area building, it is difficult for fire department personnel to locate and access that area. Therefore, Group H-2, H-3 and H-4 occupancies that are not located at the perimeter of the building are limited to 25 percent of the area limitation specified in Section 506 for the building type of construction and occupancy classification, as shown in Commentary Figure 507.8.1.1. With this option, a frontage increase per Section 506.3 is not permitted.

507.8.1.1.1 Rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use, dispensing or mixing in open systems. Rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use, dispensing or mixing in open systems having a floor area of not more than 46. m \( ^{2} \)  need not be located on the outer perimeter of the building where they are in accordance with SBC 801 and NFPA 30.

Identical language is found in Section 415.6, Exception 1, allowing small rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use, dispensing or mixing in open systems to be located within the building's interior rather than at its perimeter.

507.8.1.1.2 Liquid storage rooms and rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use in closed systems. Liquid storage rooms and rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use in closed systems having a floor area of not more than 100 m \( ^{2} \)  need not be located on the outer perimeter where they are in accordance with SBC 801 and NFPA 30.

Liquid storage rooms and rooms for flammable or combustible liquid use in closed systems that are not more than 100 m \( ^{2} \)  are permitted to be located within the building. This allowance is also reflected in Section 415.6, Exception 2.

507.8.1.1.3 Spray paint booths. Spray paint booths that comply with SBC 801 need not be located on the outer perimeter.

Spray paint booths are regulated independently by SBC 801 and NFPA 33. There is no requirement that they be located on a building's perimeter. This language is also provided in Exception 3 of Section 415.6. It should be noted that an approved spray booth is not typically classified as a Group H occupancy, but rather simply regulated as an appliance (see definition of "Spray booth" in Section 202) located within the general building occupancy. Therefore, the allowable floor area for one or more spray booths in an unlimited

===== Page 0458 =====
area building would be regulated by the provisions of SBC 801 Section 2404, not by this section. In addition, the floor area of the spray booths would not be included in the aggregate floor area of the Group H occupancies in the unlimited area building for the purposes of applying the allowable area limitations of Sections 507.8.1 and 507.8.1.1.

507.8.2 Located on building perimeter. Except as provided for in Section 507.8.1.1, Group H occupancies shall be located on the perimeter of the building. In Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies, not less than 25 percent of the perimeter of such occupancies shall be an exterior wall.

Unless in compliance with Section 507.8.1.1, Group H occupancies are to be located on the building's perimeter. More ready access to the high-hazard occupancy from the exterior of the building provides the fire department with an opportunity to respond more effectively to an incident. As set forth in Section 507.8.1, Group H-2, H-3 and H-4 occupancies that are located on the perimeter of an unlimited area building are permitted to be a maximum of 10 percent of the total building area, or the maximum area permitted by Section 506 for the Group H occupancy, whichever is less.

The increase permitted in Section 506.3 is to be based on the open frontage of Group H-2, H-3 and H-4 floor areas. In Commentary Figure 507.8.2(1), the Group H-2 floor area is located in the corner of the Group F-1 building, so that two walls of the perimeter of the Group H-2 floor area front an unoccupied open space. In accordance with Section 506.2.1, the area increase due to frontage (Ii) is calculated to be 25 percent, in accordance with the figure. Applying this factor in Equation 5-1, the allowable area for the Group H-2 occupancy is  \( [650 + (650 \times 0.25)] = 813 \, m^{2} \) . This is less than 10 percent of the total area per story [i.e., 1394 m²], so 813 m² is the maximum allowable area for the Group H-2 occupancy.

Locating the Group H-2 floor area further away from the perimeter of the Group F-1 building, as occurs in Commentary Figure 507.8.2(2), qualifies the Group H-2 floor area for an even greater allowable area increase [see Commentary Figure 507.8.2(2)].

The mandate that Group H-2 and H-3 occupancies have a minimum of 25 percent of their perimeter as an exterior wall is based on the provisions of Section 415.6. Additionally, the three exceptions to Section 415.6 are the basis for those of Sections 507.8.1.1.1, 507.8.1.1.2 and 507.8.1.1.3. Please refer to the commentary to Section 415.6 for further information.
507.8.3 Occupancy separations. Group H occupancies shall be separated from the remainder of the unlimited area building and from each other in accordance with Table 508.4.

In order to maintain the necessary fire resistance between the high-hazard areas and the remainder of the unlimited area building, the required occupancy separations established in Table 508.4 for separated occupancies must be provided.

507.8.4 Height limitations. For two-story, unlimited area buildings, Group H occupancies shall not be located more than one story above grade plane unless permitted based on the allowable height and number of stories and meter as specified in Section 504 based on the type of construction of the unlimited area building.

This section notes that the Group H occupancy must be on the first story above grade unless Table 504.4 allows for such occupancies on the second story above grade. This will depend on the type of construction. All the other size limitations still apply.

507.9 Unlimited mixed occupancy buildings with Group H-5. The area of a Group B, F, H-5, M or S building not more than two stories above grade plane shall not be limited where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 18 m in width, provided that the following criteria are met:

1 Buildings containing Group H-5 occupancy shall be of Type I or II construction.

2 Each area used for Group H-5 occupancy shall be separated from other occupancies as required in Sections 415.11 and 508.4.

3 Each area used for Group H-5 occupancy shall not exceed the maximum allowable area permitted for such occupancies in Section 503.1 including modifications of Section 506.

Exception: Where the Group H-5 occupancy exceeds the maximum allowable area, the Group H-5 shall be subdivided into areas that are separated by 2-hour fire barriers.

Group H-5 occupancy has a relative hazard based on allowable area per Table 506.2 that is equal to or better than B, F, M, and S occupancies. Adding H-5 occupancy to the occupancies that are allowed to have unlimited area in accordance with Section 507.5 would be consistent with the permitted level of hazard and mitigation established by this section. The code required mitigating features of H-5 occupancy have been demonstrated to be

===== Page 0459 =====
effective since the introduction of the semiconductor fabrication facility occupancy in the model codes.

The exception permits larger H-5 facilities than under previous codes, where 2-hour fire barriers are provided, separating areas of the building.

507.10 Aircraft paint hangar. The area of a Group H-2 aircraft paint hangar not more than one story above grade plane shall not be limited where such aircraft paint hangar complies with the provisions of Section 412.5 and is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 18 m in width than one and one-half times the building height.

Because of their specialized nature and the required size of these facilities, one-story Group H-2 aircraft paint hangars are not limited in area if they meet all of the requirements of Section 412.5. This section requires that the building be of Type I or II construction and have a fire suppression system in accordance with NFPA 409. This standard requires a foam-water suppression system in the paint areas and water sprinklers in all accessory areas. The criteria for the foam-water system depends on the size (and classification in accordance with NFPA 409) of the hangar. Other requirements of Section 412.5 include compartmentalized storage and use of flammable liquids, compliance with SBC 801 for spray application of flammable liquids and compliance with SBC 501 for ventilation of flammable-finish application areas (see

In addition to compliance with Section 412.5, the hangar must be surrounded by open space. However, instead of the 18 m width required for other buildings, the open space surrounding the hangar must be at least one and one-half times the height of the building. Therefore, if the hangar was 9 m high, there would need to be at least 13.5 m [9 m × 1.5] of open space surrounding the building.

Note that one-story paint hangars would also be permitted to exceed the height limit of Table 504.3 if the exception to Section 504.1 is satisfied. Note, further, that Section 507.2.1 cannot be applied to buildings built under Section 507.10.

507.11 Group E buildings. The area of a Group E building not more than one story above grade plane, of Type II, IIIA or IV construction, shall not be limited provided that the following criteria are met:

1 Each classroom shall have not less than two means of egress, with one of the means of egress being a direct exit to the outside of the building complying with Section 1022.
2 The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

3 The building is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 18 m in width.

This Section permits Group E structures to be built as unlimited area buildings. A direct exit to the outside from each classroom must be provided in addition to another means of egress. It is clear in the wording that to fulfill this requirement, students must be able to egress the classroom directly to the outside without intervening corridors, exit passageways or exit enclosures. The unlimited area school building must also be fully sprinkled in accordance with NFPA 13 (Section 903.3.1.1), have open space surrounding the building of at least 18 m and be no more than one story above grade plane. See the commentary to Section 507.2 regarding the required open space. Please note that Section 507.2.1 cannot be applied to buildings built under Section 507.11.

Where associated assembly spaces are included as part of the Group E occupancy classification in accordance with Section 303.1.3, they would also be allowed to be unlimited in area under this section. The type of construction is limited to Type II, IIIA or IV.

507.12 Motion picture theaters. In buildings of Type II construction, the area of a motion picture theater located on the first story above grade plane shall not be limited where the building is provided with an automatic sprinkler system throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and is surrounded and adjoined by public ways or yards not less than 18 m in width.

Motion picture theaters located in buildings of Type II construction that are no more than one story above grade plane may be unlimited in area by virtue of being of noncombustible construction and having low fire loading and sprinkler protection in accordance with NFPA 13. The building must also be surrounded by at least 18 m of open space. See the commentary to Section 507.2 regarding the required open space. Section 507.2.1 can be applied to buildings built under Section 507.12.

507.13 Covered and open mall buildings and anchor buildings. The area of covered and open mall buildings and anchor buildings not exceeding three stories in height that comply with Section 402 shall not be limited.

This Section is simply included as a reference to Section 402 for covered malls. The definition of “Covered mall” includes open malls as well. An open mall is very similar to a covered mall but the central pedestrian mall area is open to

===== Page 0460 =====
the sky. If an open mall complies with the provisions for covered malls under Section 402, it is allowed to be of unlimited area. See the commentary to Section 507.2 regarding the required open space. While Section 507.2.1 does not include Section 507.13, Section 402.1.1 permits a similar reduction in open space.

## SECTION 508 MIXED USE AND OCCUPANCY

508.1 General. Each portion of a building shall be individually classified in accordance with Section 302.1. Where a building contains more than one occupancy group, the building or portion thereof shall comply with the applicable provisions of Section 508.2, 508.3, 508.4, 508.5 or a combination of these sections.

## Exceptions:

1. Occupancies separated in accordance with Section 510.

2. Where required by Table 415.6.5, areas of Group H-1, H-2 and H-3 occupancies shall be located in a detached building or structure.

Very frequently, buildings are designed for multiple uses, and typically that will result in the building having more than one occupancy classification. This Section describes the provisions governing where a building contains more than one of the occupancies identified in Sections 303 through 312. For example, a facility that appears to be used solely for storage often has a small office area for bookkeeping and other purposes. Because the office would be classified as a business occupancy, the building would be identified as a mixed occupancy, storage (Group S-1) and business (Group B).

The Section contains four major parts reflecting optional approaches to mixed occupancy:

1 Section 508.2 addresses situations where a building contains a main occupancy with one or more minor areas classified as different accessory occupancies that can be treated for allowable area purposes as part of the main occupancy.

2 Section 508.3 addresses mixed occupancies that are not separated from each other where the building is regulated for several of the worst-case conditions of each occupancy involved. In other words, certain requirements for each occupancy are addressed on a building-wide basis.

3 Section 508.4 addresses mixed occupancies where occupancies of different hazard levels are separated. Such buildings contain more than one occupancy classification, but occupancies with different hazard levels are separated from each other by fire-resistance-rated construction.

4 Section 508.5 addresses live/work units that provide the option for as much as 50 percent of nonresidential use within what is classified as a Group R-2 dwelling unit.

The final sentence of this Section reemphasizes the choice for the designer to use the provisions of only one of the four options or a mixture of the options in different portions of a building. For example, a building could be designed to comply with only Section 508.3 for nonseparated mixed occupancies and not comply with any of the provisions of either Section 508.2 or 508.4. A different example could be to use the provisions of Section 508.3 on the first story of a building having three or four different occupancies, but then separate the upper stories of the building from the first story and design the upper stories under Section 508.4 for separated occupancies. A final example would be a building that was predominately one use but had small accessory areas on various stories. For this building, the best option might be Section 508.2 regarding accessory occupancies.

These options depend on the limitations of their use, as stated in the respective sections of the code. Basically, the availability of the options depends on the size of the areas desired for each different occupancy, and the relationship of one occupancy to the other.

Exception 1 provides a fourth set of options for mixed occupancies by referring to Section 510, which describes various special circumstances, including where parking garages are located above or below other uses.

Exception 2 reminds the user that including Group H-1, H-2 or H-3 in the same building with other occupancies where quantities exceed certain amounts is prohibited by Section 415.6.2 because of the nature of the hazard for high quantities of flammable, combustible and explosive materials. These H occupancies are, or may be, required to be in a detached building, meaning such buildings not only can't contain other occupancies but must be physically separated from other structures.

Note that Section 509 regulates incidental uses that, where they occur as part of an occupancy, require additional protection or separation from the balance of the building. Incidental uses are part of the occupancy. The presence of an incidental use in a building does not establish a mixed occupancy condition, and as such is not required to comply with Section 508.

508.2 Accessory occupancies. Accessory occupancies are those occupancies that are ancillary

===== Page 0461 =====
to the main occupancy of the building or portion thereof. Accessory occupancies shall comply with the provisions of Sections 508.2.1 through 508.2.4

Buildings often have rooms or spaces with an occupancy classification that is different from, but accessory to, the principal occupancy classification of the building. Where such accessory areas are limited in size, they will not ordinarily represent a significantly different life safety hazard. This principle does not apply where otherwise indicated in Section 508.2.4 for areas classified as Group H, I-1 or R.

The accessory occupancy must be ancillary to the principal purpose for which the structure is occupied. This means that the purpose and function of the area is subordinate and secondary to the structure's primary function. As such, the activities that occur in accessory use areas are necessary for the principal occupancy to properly function and would not otherwise reasonably exist apart from the principal occupancy.

508.2.1 Occupancy classification. Accessory occupancies shall be individually classified in accordance with Section 302.1. The requirements of this code shall apply to each portion of the building based on the occupancy classification of that space.

Under Section 508.2.1, each accessory use is to be classified in accordance with Section 302 in the appropriate occupancy classification. Code requirements for means of egress, sprinkler protection, interior finishes and so on are to be determined for this occupancy as if it were a main occupancy of the building. For example, an accessory lunchroom located in a business office regulated as an accessory occupancy would need to be protected with an automatic sprinkler system if the lunchroom's occupant load exceeds 100. In addition, any means of egress doors serving the lunchroom, from the lunchroom to the exterior exit doors, would need to be provided with panic hardware. The lunchroom would need to comply with all other code requirements applicable to a Group A-2 use.

Please note that Sections 508.2.2 and 508.2.3 state that height and area of the building are based on the main occupancy. Therefore, for determining the construction type for the total building, the building's floor area and height should be compared to the limits of Tables 504.3, 504.4 and 506.2 to determine the appropriate construction type. See Section 508.2.3 regarding the area of the accessory occupancy itself and see Section 508.2.2 regarding the height of the accessory occupancy itself.
Where applying Chapter 9, many of the requirements for automatic sprinkler systems are based on the size of the fire area in which the occupancy is located. For instance, a Group A-2 occupancy requires a sprinkler system where the fire area is greater than 465 m² or where the fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more. By definition, a "Fire area" includes everything between fire barriers, fire walls or exterior walls. Thus, if there is no rated separation of the accessory occupancy from the main occupancy, the fire area could, and most likely will, contain both the accessory occupancy area and the main occupancy.

Continuing with this example, suppose that a single story business office of 2135 m² contains a lunchroom that is 185 m² and an occupant load of 134. The main occupancy is a Group B, and the accessory occupancy is a Group A-2. Because the Group A-2 occupancy has a floor area of less than 10 percent of the overall floor area of the single story, it could be regulated as an accessory occupancy, and there is no fire separation requirement between the Group A-2 and Group B occupancies. A Group A-2 occupancy is required to be provided with an automatic sprinkler system when it is either in excess of 465 m² or 100 occupants. Since this fire area is 2135 m², contains a Group A-2 occupancy with an occupant load of over 100 and is located within a fire area of greater than 465 m², this fire area would need to be provided with an automatic sprinkler system throughout both the Group B and A-2 occupancies based on either of the two thresholds of the A-2 occupancy.

508.2.2 Allowable building height. The allowable height and number of stories of the building containing accessory occupancies shall be in accordance with Section 504 for the main occupancy of the building.

The story location of an accessory occupancy is controlled by the main occupancy. For example, Table 504.4 would allow a sprinkler-protected Group B office building of Type IIIA construction to be six stories. A Group A-2 restaurant in that same building would be limited to locations on the lowest four stories. However, an accessory Group A-2 cafeteria for employees would be considered part of the Group B occupancy for determination of allowable height. Therefore, it could be on any of the six stories.

508.2.3 Allowable building area. The allowable area of the building shall be based on the applicable provisions of Section 506 for the main occupancy of the building. Aggregate accessory occupancies shall not occupy more than 10 percent of the floor area of the story in which they are located and shall

===== Page 0462 =====
not exceed the tabular values for nonsprinklered buildings in Table 506.2 for each such accessory occupancy.

The area of the building containing the accessory occupancy is limited in size based on the area of the main occupancy. The code imposes those limits on the assumption that with limited size the accessory occupancies pose a limited increase in the degree of hazard over the primary occupancy. The aggregate area within a story devoted to the accessory occupancies must not be greater than 10 percent of the area of that story [see Commentary Figure 508.2.3(1)].

The area of the portion of the building devoted to an accessory occupancy must also be less than the tabular building area for nonsprinklered buildings given in Table 506.2, based on the group classification that most nearly resembles the accessory occupancy under consideration. Area increases for street frontage based on the provisions of Section 506 are not allowed [see Commentary Figure 508.2.3(2)].
See also the commentary to Section 508.2.1.

508.2.4 Separation of occupancies. No separation is required between accessory occupancies and the main occupancy.

Exceptions:

1. Group H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5 occupancies shall be separated from all other occupancies in accordance with Section 508.4.

2. Group I-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 dwelling units and sleeping units shall be separated from other dwelling or sleeping units and from accessory occupancies contiguous to them in accordance with the requirements of Section 420.

When a designer is using Section 508.2, most accessory occupancies need not be separated from the main occupancy. Please note that even where an accessory occupancy is not separated from the main occupancy under the provisions of Section 508.2.4, there may be other provisions of the code that might require a fire-resistance-rated separation. For instance, if it was desired not to provide a sprinkler system in the fire area discussed in the commentary example in Section 508.2.1, then a fire barrier would need to be installed to make the fire area containing the Group A-2 occupancy smaller than the threshold amount of 465 m² and below the 100-occupant threshold. Or, in some cases there could be a wall between two different occupancies that is required by another section of the code to be fire-resistance rated (e.g., a separation wall is provided that also serves as a corridor wall that is required to be fire-resistance rated).

Exception 1 addresses the need to separate Group H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5 occupancies because of the higher risk posed by these high-hazard occupancies. Please notice that Group H-1 occupancies are not mentioned because these occupancies are always required to be located in a separate building (see Section 415.7).

Exception 2 states that the separation between dwelling units and sleeping units and any accessory occupancies must still comply with Section 420. For example, a common lounge or manager's office that otherwise might qualify as an accessory occupancy within an apartment building must still be separated from adjoining dwelling units.

Those rooms and spaces listed in Table 509.1 are incidental uses and are not to be considered as accessory occupancies, but rather must be separated or protected as specified in the table.

508.3 Nonseparated occupancies. Buildings or portions of buildings that comply with the provisions of this section shall be considered as Nonseparated occupancies.

This section describes the second option a designer may choose to apply to a building that contains more than one occupancy classification. Except with respect to occupancies classified in Group H, this option is similar to the accessory occupancy option (see Section 508.2) in that there is no requirement for various occupancies to be physically separated by any type of fire-Figure 508.3).

The principle behind Nonseparated occupancies is that the different occupancies within the same building do not have to be separated by fire-resistance rated assemblies if the building complies throughout with the more restrictive code requirements for minimum construction type and fire protection systems (Chapter 9) applicable to the occupancies in the building. If the building is also a high-rise building, the most restrictive provisions of Section 403 applicable to the specific occupancies in the building will also apply. Although each occupancy is separately classified as to its group, a fire-resistance-rated assembly is not required by the Nonseparated occupancies option. A designer may choose to physically separate the occupancies; however, a fire-resistance rating of these separations would not be required by this section.

There are four basic steps to follow when applying the Nonseparated occupancies concept:

===== Page 0463 =====
Step 1: Determine which occupancy group classifications are present in the building.

Step 2: Determine the minimum type of construction based on the height and area of the building for each occupancy in accordance with Section 503 as if each occupancy occurred throughout the building. Compare the requirements for each occupancy and then apply the requirement for the highest type of construction to the entire building (see Section 508.3.2).

Step 3: Apply the most restrictive provisions found in Chapter 9 throughout the building containing Nonseparated occupancies. For example, if the two occupancies in a 557 m² building are Group B and Group A-2, even though Section 903 does not require an automatic sprinkler system in nonhigh-rise Group B buildings, it does require sprinklers in a Group A-2 building of this size. For this example, the building with these Nonseparated occupancies would need to be fully sprinkled. For a high-rise building, also apply the most restrictive provisions contained in Section 403 related to the occupancies present (see Section 508.3.1).

Step 4: Apply all other requirements of the code, except for Section 403 and Chapter 9, to each occupancy individually based on the specific occupancy of each space (e.g., means of egress).

508.3.1 Occupancy classification. Nonseparated occupancies shall be individually classified in accordance with Section 302.1. The requirements of this code shall apply to each portion of the building based on the occupancy classification of that space. In addition, the most restrictive provisions of Chapter 9 that apply to the Nonseparated occupancies shall apply to the total Nonseparated occupancy area.

The nonseparated occupancies option requires that each occupancy area be considered a different occupancy for purposes of application of code requirements and therefore requires that all code issues related to that occupancy be considered separately for the areas of the building where the occupancy is located. The exception to this is for the provisions of Chapter 9, which must be applied to the whole building containing the nonseparated occupancies.

The principle behind the nonseparated occupancies concept is that different occupancies within the same building do not have to be separated by fire-resistance-rated assemblies if the building complies throughout with the most restrictive code requirements for construction type and fire protection systems. Although each occupancy group is separately classified as to its group, a fire-resistance-rated assembly is not required under the nonseparated occupancies option. A designer may choose to physically separate the occupancies; however, a fire-resistance rating of these separations would not be required by this section, as stated in Section 508.3.3.

For example, if a building contains both Groups B and M, each portion of the building must comply with the code requirements for its respective group classification. Occupant loads for each occupancy area will be determined using Table 1004.5, based on the uses within each area. Live loads for the Group B area are applied to the area of business occupancy. Group M live loads are applied to the area of mercantile occupancy. Exterior wall ratings based on fire separation distance (see Table 602) apply to exterior walls of the business occupancy for Group B buildings; the same is true for walls in Group M occupancies.

It is important to note the threshold requirements for fire protection systems are contained in Chapter 9. In some cases, they are simply based on the occupancy, and in other cases they are based on height or area criteria. Also, the requirements to be met in some cases only apply to the fire area in which a given occupancy is contained, while in others they apply to the entire building.

For example, if the business occupancy as described in Commentary Figure 508.3 required a fire alarm system with manual fire alarm boxes, then one would be required for the entire building—even though Chapter 9 does not require a fire alarm system for a storage occupancy. Note that when determining if a fire alarm system is required, if the threshold for the requirement is based on occupant load, that threshold is based on the occupant load of the individual occupancy and not for all the occupancies in the nonseparated building (see commentary, Section 907.2).

508.3.1.1 High rise buildings. Where Nonseparated occupancies occur in a high-rise building, the most restrictive requirements of Section 403 that apply to the Nonseparated occupancies shall apply throughout the high-rise building.

Where a high-rise building is designed under the nonseparated occupancy approach, there are a few provisions in Section 403 that are specific to occupancy groups. If Section 403 has a specific requirement or limitation that is applicable to one of the occupancies in the high-rise building, then such requirement or limitation applies to the complete high-rise building regardless of the occupancy of other spaces.

===== Page 0464 =====
508.3.1.2 Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancies. Where one of the nonseparated occupancies is Group I-2, Condition 2, the most restrictive requirements of Sections 407, 509 and 709 shall apply throughout the fire area containing the Group I-2 occupancy. The most restrictive requirements of Chapter 10 shall apply to the path of egress from the Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancy up to and including the exit discharge.

Section 508.3.1 already states that the requirements of this code apply to each portion of the building based on the occupancy classification of that space. Therefore, applying I-2 requirements outside of the Group I-2 designated areas isn't required. This Section allows a design where a fire area can be established that includes both a Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancy and other occupancies such as Group B offices, Group B clinics, Group M gift shops or Group A cafeteria. Within that fire area, the provisions of Sections 407, 509 and 712 applicable to Group I-2 would prevail. Outside that fire area, Section 508.3.1 will set the use parameters. Creating the fire area does not override the requirement for smoke barriers to establish minimum smoke compartments. Where constructed to also meet the requirements of smoke barriers, the fire barriers establishing the fire area can also provide a boundary for the smoke compartments. If the areas that contain other uses are utilized for the movement of care recipients in bed or refuge areas, the Group I-2 exiting provisions would also apply to those areas.

508.3.2 Allowable building area, height and number of stories. The allowable building area, height and number of stories of the building or portion thereof shall be based on the most restrictive allowances for the occupancy groups under consideration for the type of construction of the building in accordance with Section 503.1.

The fundamental concept underlying the Nonseparated occupancies option is that the allowable building heights and allowable building areas are based on the most restrictive requirements of Table 504.3, Table 504.4 and Table 506.2 applicable to each of the occupancy groups in the mixed occupancy building.

For example, the tabular area for Group S-1 in Table 506.2 is less than the corresponding tabular area for Group B. Therefore, Group S-1 results in a requirement for a higher type of construction for buildings of equal size and will determine the minimum construction type of the building. If the building were, say, Type IIB construction with a sprinkler system, then the allowable area for the building would be 6500 m², based on the allowable area of Group S-1 occupancies for Type IIB construction in Section 506. Area increases for frontage could be applied. The same methodology of applying the most restrictive criteria of Table 506.2 is used to evaluate the maximum permitted height in stories and meter above grade plane based on Section 504.

508.3.3 Separation. No separation is required between Nonseparated occupancies.

Exceptions:

1. Group H-2, H-3, H-4 and H-5 occupancies shall be separated from all other occupancies in accordance with Section 508.4.

2. Group I-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 dwelling units and sleeping units shall be separated from other dwelling or sleeping units and from other occupancies contiguous to them in accordance with the requirements of Section 420.

As is indicated by the name (nonseparated occupancies) of this mixed occupancy option, the occupancy groups within the building need not be separated from each other by fire-resistance-rated construction. It must be noted that other portions of the code might require fire separation assemblies, and where the separations are required by other provisions, they must be provided even in a building designed under the nonseparated mixed occupancy option. For instance, if it was desired not to provide a sprinkler system in the fire area discussed in the commentary example in Section 508.2.1, then a fire barrier would need to be installed to make the fire area containing the Group A-2 occupancy smaller than the threshold amount of 465 m² and the occupant load less than 100. In another example, there could be a wall between two different occupancies that is required by another Section of the code to be fire-resistance rated (e.g., a separation wall that also serves as a corridor wall that is required to be fire-resistance rated).

When one or more of the occupancies is a Group H-2, H-3, H-4 or H-5 high-hazard occupancy, the nonseparated occupancies option could not be applied for the Group H portions of the building (Exception 1). Any Group H occupancies would must be separated as required by Section 508.4 for separated occupancies.

Exception 2 states that the horizontal assemblies and walls required to separate dwelling units and sleeping units from each other and from other occupancies must comply with Section 420 even if the nonseparated occupancies provisions are applied.

===== Page 0465 =====
Example: A building contains a 4278 m \( ^{2} \)  general warehouse and an accompanying 2700 m \( ^{2} \)  regional dispatch office for a total area of 6978 m \( ^{2} \) . The building is a one-story, metal building. Assume that there is no allowable area increase for frontage. In applying the four-step procedure for nonseparated uses (see commentary, Section 508.3), the following holds true:

Step 1: The warehouse is classified in Group S-1 and the offices are classified in Group B.

Step 2: The minimum type of construction is based on the lesser allowable area of the building for each occupancy classification. First, determine if any increases can be obtained (no frontage increase). Note, in Step 3, the building is required to be sprinkled. For the purpose of analysis, assume the building is of Type IIB construction. The Group B requirements would allow the building to be 8547 m² (At = 8547 m² from Table 506.2, with no frontage increases). The Group S-1 requirements, however, only allow a building of Type IIB construction to be 6503 m². The most restrictive is the Group S-1 requirement; therefore, it governs. Hence, Type IIB construction would not allow adequate area for the S-1 occupancy. Since the most restrictive allowable area is required to be considered, a higher construction type would be required. The minimum type of construction needs to be Type IIA.

Step 3: The fire area containing the occupancy classified in Group S-1 is more than 1115 m²; thus, in accordance with Section 903.2.9, this building must be sprinkled. The area classified as Group B ordinarily is not required to be equipped with sprinklers by Section 903. However, since the Group S-1 provision does require sprinkler protection, it is more restrictive than the requirement for Group B under Chapter 9. Therefore, the entire building must be provided with sprinkler protection.

Step 4: The occupant load of each area should be calculated separately (based on the occupancy of that area) using Section 1004.1 and Table 1004.5.

Business: = 2700 m² divided by 9 m² per person = 300 people.

Storage: = 4278 m² divided by (warehouses) 46 m² per person = 93 people. Total occupant load: 393 people

The evaluation of means of egress in accordance with Chapter 10 is then based on these occupant loads.

The load-bearing members in the north, east and west exterior walls of the building must provide a minimum 1-hour fire-resistance rating as required for Type IIA construction in Table 601. The non-load-bearing walls are also required to have a 1-hour fire resistance rating because of the 4.5 m fire separation distance (see Table 705.5).

The fire separation distance on the south side of the mixed occupancy building is 2.5 m. Table 705.5 requires the Group S-1 and B portions of this wall to have a 1-hour fire-resistance rating. The ratings required by this table apply to both load-bearing and non-load-bearing exterior walls. All exterior walls (whether load bearing or nonload-bearing) in this building are required to have a 1-hour fire-resistance rating.

This analysis must be continued for other aspects of code compliance for each respective occupancy.

508.4 Separated occupancies. Buildings or portions of buildings that comply with the provisions of this section shall be considered as separated occupancies.

This Section describes the third option, separated occupancies, that a designer may choose to apply where constructing a building that contains more than one occupancy classification. This option differs from the first two alternatives (accessory occupancies and nonseparated occupancies, see Sections 508.2 and 508.3) in four ways:

Occupancies that are to be evaluated as separated occupancies must be separated in accordance with Table 508.4. When the table requires a separation, the occupancies must be separated completely, both horizontally and vertically, by the provision of fire-resistance rated fire barriers and horizontal assemblies (see Sections 707 and 711). It should be noted that Table 508.4 indicates "N" at the intersection of some occupancies. The "N" indicates that no rated separation is required. This is allowed where the adjacent occupancies pose similar levels of risk. Separations, where provided, do not necessarily create separate fire areas. Table 508.4 is not intended to be used for determining the required fire-resistance rating for creating multiple fire areas. The minimum separations for fire area purposes are established in Table 707.3.10.

The determination of the minimum type of construction is based on both the height of each occupancy relative to the grade plane and the areas of each occupancy relative to the total area per story.

3 Allowable building area is determined based on the occupancies on each story through a comparison of the allowed area for each occupancy category and the actual floor area proposed for each occupancy.

===== Page 0466 =====
4 In comparison to the Nonseparated occupancies provisions in Section 508.3 where the most restrictive of the requirements of Chapter 9 apply throughout the building, under separated occupancies, requirements for such systems as sprinkler systems, alarms and standpipes are determined based on the areas containing each occupancy. It must be noted that the determination of sprinkler requirements in Section 903 is based on the occupancies present. The threshold for providing a sprinkler system is often based on the size of a fire area. In the cases where Table 508.4 does not require a separation, the result is that certain fire areas will contain more than one occupancy. Therefore, when determining where sprinklers are required, the total size of the fire area needs to be considered, not just the portion containing each occupancy.

For example, a proposed building is 1486 m², there is 743 m² of Group M occupancy and 743 m² of Group B. According to Table 508.4, there does not need to be a separation between these two occupancies. Individually, neither is large enough to require a sprinkler system. However, if no separation is provided, the fire area is 1486 m². In accordance with Section 903.2.7 a fire area containing a Group M occupancy and exceeding 1115 m² must be sprinkler protected. [Fire areas (defined in Section 202) are used in Section 903.2 to determine if sprinklers are required. Fire areas are a distinct requirement from separation of occupancies. The separation of occupancies by a fire-resistance-rated wall may not always create a separate fire area. Fire areas can be delineated by fire walls, fire barriers and horizontal assemblies, per Chapter 7.]

There are four basic steps to follow when using the separated occupancies option:

Step 1: Determine which occupancies are present in the building (see Section 508.4.1).

Step 2: Separate the occupancies in accordance with Table 508.4 with fire barrier walls and horizontal assemblies in accordance with Sections 707 and 711 (see Section 508.4.4).

Step 3: Apply all code requirements for each separated space individually based on the occupancy or occupancies present (i.e., design occupant load, means of egress elements, exterior wall requirements and fire protection). For the application of code provisions, each separated space is taken into consideration individually. Again, it must be remembered that Table 508.4 may not require a separation and, therefore, code requirements based on fire area must be addressed for the total fire area even though it contains more than one occupancy.

Step 4: Determine the minimum type of construction of a building based on the building height limitations of Sections 503 and 504 and the building area limitations of Sections 503 and 506 (see Sections 508.4.3 and 508.4.2, respectively).

Part A: Determine the minimum type of construction required based on the height of each occupancy relative to the grade plane (see Section 508.4.3). This must be evaluated for both height in meter and stories above grade plane.

Part B: Determine the minimum type of construction based on a weighted average of areas occupied by the various occupancies (see Section. 508.4.2).

The purpose of Table 508.4 is to set forth the fire-resistance rating required for fire barrier walls and horizontal assemblies used to separate occupancies. The fire-resistance rating of the separation between different occupancies is based on the relative anticipated fire severity of the occupancies. The remainder of this Table was filled in for the 2021 code cycle to avoid confusion and make the Table more functional.

“N” in this Table is present where a separation is not required between the uses because the hazards of the two uses are the same. “NP” in this Table is used where an occupancy is required to be sprinkled, so the nonsprinklered option is not permitted. “S” is for occupancies that are equipped throughout with an NFPA 13 sprinkler system. “NS” is for occupancies that are either not sprinkled or are sprinkled with an NFPA 13R or NFPA 13D system.

Note a: A reference is made to Section 420 for provisions requiring the separation of dwelling units and sleeping units in Group I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 occupancies (see commentary, Section 420).

Note b: The fire-resistance rating of spaces used solely for private, or pleasure vehicles may be reduced by 1 hour but never less than 1 hour.

Note c: See the commentary for Section 406.3.2 for separation for private garages and carports.

Note d: Occupancies in the same classification do not need to be separated. A Group H-3 occupancy does not need to be separated from a different Group H-3 use.

Note e: See Section 422.2 for specific requirements for ambulatory care facilities that are required to be separated.

Note f: This note reminds users of the distinct fire wall requirements found in Section 707. A

===== Page 0467 =====
fire barrier provided for occupancy separation in accordance with this Table would also have to meet the minimum rating found in Table 707.3.10 in order for it to also delineate the boundary of a fire area.

508.4.1 Occupancy classification. Separated occupancies shall be individually classified in accordance with Section 302.1. Each separated space shall comply with this code based on the occupancy classification of that portion of the building. The most restrictive provisions of Chapter 9 that apply to the separate occupancies shall apply to the total non-fire-barrier-separated occupancy areas. Occupancy separations that serve to define fire area limits established in Chapter 9 for requiring a fire protection system shall also comply with Section 901.7.

In the separated occupancies option, occupancies that are to be evaluated as separated occupancies must be separated in accordance with Table 508.4. When a separation is required, occupancies must be separated completely, both horizontally and vertically, with fire barriers and horizontal assemblies (see Sections 707 and 711). Where two or more occupancies are in the same space and Table 508.4 allows them to be unseparated, this area must comply with Chapter 9 based on the most stringent of the provisions applicable to the occupancies in the unseparated space.

Except for certain occupancies, it is the designer's prerogative to use the accessory occupancies option, nonseparated occupancies option or the separated occupancies option when establishing a mixed occupancy building. It is also possible to apply both or all three options within different portions or different stories of a building. Where a mixture of options is used, the design documentation needs to clearly show how the requirements of each option are applied in each portion of the building.

508.4.2 Allowable building area. In each story, the building area shall be such that the sum of the ratios of the actual building area of each separated occupancy divided by the allowable building area of each separated occupancy shall not exceed 1.

Allowable building areas are determined through application of Section 506. In the evaluation of allowable area, intervening fire barriers between different fire areas containing the same occupancy are not a consideration. In determining the floor area per occupancy, all areas of the same occupancy are added together irrespective of the presence of multiple fire areas.
In determining the allowable areas for each occupancy, the frontage increase can be applied; thus, the allowable areas are intended to include the increases permitted for open perimeter. For determination of the allowable perimeter increase, use the entire building perimeter—not the occupancy perimeters.

508.4.3 Allowable building height and number of stories. Each separated occupancy shall comply with the building height limitations and story limitations based on the type of construction of the building in accordance with Section 503.1.
Exception: Special provisions of Section 510 shall permit occupancies at building heights and number of stories other than provided in 503.1.
The allowable height is occupancy dependent. As long as individual occupancies meet the height limitations based on a measurement from grade plane, then the building complies. For example, a building of Type IIB construction with no increases for sprinklers containing a Group B occupancy and a Group F-1 occupancy could be three stories. The only limitation in this case, in terms of building height, would be that the Group F-1 occupancy could not be located any higher than the second story.

508.4.4 Separation. Individual occupancies shall be separated from adjacent occupancies in accordance with Table 508.4.
Table 508.4 provides the required separation between areas containing separated occupancies. Separations must be of fire-resistance-rated construction for 1, 2 or 3 hours as specified in the cells of the table. Generally, the required rating will be higher if a building is not fully protected by an automatic sprinkler system. The table states "NP" in certain cells. These occur where occupancies are not permitted to be in a mixed occupancy building, or where one or both occupancies cannot be in a nonsprinklered building. Other cells contain the letter "N." For the adjoining occupancies represented by each such cell, no separation is required. Although certain adjacent occupancies are not required to be physically separated, they are still evaluated under the separated option, but note that, where code requirements are based on established fire areas, occupancies not separated must be considered as sharing the same fire area.

For example, a completely sprinklered building of Type VB construction contains areas devoted to business and assembly occupancies. The designer has chosen the separated occupancies option and has completely separated the areas containing the two different occupancies by fire barriers.

===== Page 0468 =====
(complying with Section 707) and horizontal assemblies (complying with Section 711) having a minimum 1-hour fire-resistance rating in accordance with Table 508.4. This is found by consulting the box at the interSection of the "A, E" row and the "B, F-1, M, S-1" column. Because the entire building is sprinkled, the fire-resistance rating of the fire barrier walls and horizontal assemblies is required to be 1 hour, as indicated in the column designated "S." Had the building not been sprinkled, the required rating would have been 2 hours, as indicated in the column designated "NS."

Please note that Table 508.4 contains groupings of some of the occupancies, including:

• A, E

• I-1, I-3, I-4

• R

• F-2, S-2, U

• B, F-1, M, S-1

• H-3, H-4

These are occupancies that share the same level of hazard with respect to fire safety. It is possible, therefore, to have two occupancies that comply with these separated use provisions that require no separation between them. For instance, a mixed occupancy of Groups B and M would not be required to have a separation between them, but the provisions for calculation of the sum of the ratios of actual areas to allowable areas must still be applied.

508.4.4.1 Construction. Required separations shall be fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both, so as to completely separate adjacent occupancies. Mass timber elements serving as fire barriers or horizontal assemblies to separate occupancies in Type IV-B or IV-C construction shall be separated from the interior of the building with an approved thermal barrier consisting of gypsum board that is not less than 12.5 mm in thickness or a material that is tested in accordance with and meets the acceptance criteria of both the Temperature Transmission Fire Test and the Integrity Fire Test of NFPA 275.

This Section is merely a reference to the appropriate provisions in Chapter 7 for fire-resistance-rated assemblies that are required to meet the provisions for separation of occupancies. Also included is a requirement for mass timber elements separating occupancies in new construction Types IV-B and IV-C to be provided with a thermal barrier, even if other Sections of this code would permit these elements to be exposed.

The following three examples illustrate the application of the separated occupancies option.

Example 1: A four-story building contains a retail store on the first story, a lecture hall with fixed seats on the second story and offices on the top two stories. Each story is 975 m². A sprinkler system is not provided throughout the building. Assume that there is no open perimeter increase [see Commentary Figure 508.4.4.1(1)]. In applying the four-step procedure for separated uses (see commentary, Section 508.4), the following holds true:

Step 1: First story is Group M for the entire story. Second story is Group A-3 for the entire story. Third and fourth stories are Group B for both entire stories.

Step 2: The separation requirements in accordance with Table 508.4 require a 2-hour fire resistance rating for the horizontal assembly between the Group M occupancy and the Group A-3 occupancy. Likewise, a 2-hour fire-resistance rated horizontal assembly is required between the Group A-3 occupancy and the Group B occupancy. Each occupancy is separated horizontally with an approved fire-resistance-rated assembly. There is no rating required for the horizontal assembly between the third and fourth stories because they are in the same occupancy.

Step 3: The occupancy-specific requirements need to be addressed. The building is essentially broken into the following three areas based on the separations provided to achieve the separated occupancy requirements:

Group M area = 975 m².

Group A-3 area = 975 m².

Group B area = 1950 m² [combined area for two stories, each 975 m²].

Because of the construction required in this example for each separation, these occupancy areas may also be separate fire areas as determined by Table 707.3.10.

Since the story containing the Group M occupancy is also a fire area that is less than 1115 m² and is located below the fourth story, sprinklers are not required for the Group M occupancy.

The story containing the Group A-3 occupancy is also a fire area that is less than 1115 m², but it is located on the second story and above the level of exit discharge. According to Section 903.2.1.3, a Group A-3 occupancy fire area in this location must be provided with a sprinkler system. In addition, this would mean that the Group M occupancy would be required to be

===== Page 0469 =====
sprinklered in accordance with Section 903.2.1, which requires that all stories between the Group A-3 occupancy and the level of exit discharge be sprinklered.

The third and fourth stories containing the Group B occupancy do not require sprinklers because neither the size nor height of these stories triggers any threshold in Section 903. Additionally, provisions in other parts of the code for each occupancy area (e.g., means of egress, exterior wall requirements, interior finishes) should be used based on the occupancy located on each story. For example, the design occupant load of the area containing the Group M occupancy is based on the mercantile occupant load factor found in Table 1004.5 while the area containing the Group A-3 occupancy is based on the number of fixed seats in the lecture hall in accordance with Section 1004.6.

Step 4:
Part A: Review for the minimum types of construction based on the height limitations for each of the three occupancies as follows [see Commentary Figure 508.4.4.1(2)]:
1 Group M, one story in height; the minimum type of construction is Type VA [two stories and 12 m in accordance with Section 504].

2 Group A-3, two stories in height; the minimum type of construction is Type VA [two stories and 15 m in accordance with Section 504].

3 Group B, four stories in height; the minimum type of construction is Type IIIA [five stories and 20 m in accordance with Section 504].

The highest type of construction for any one of the occupancies governs for the entire building; thus, the minimum allowable type of construction permitted for the building based on height is Type IIIA. The designer is permitted to choose any one of the construction types other than Types IIB, IIIB, VA and VB for the design of the building. The separated occupancy option presumes that each occupancy is restricted to the story (or stories) for which it is designated. For this example, the first story is separated and designated for the Group M occupancy, and the Group M occupancy can only occur on that story. In comparison, the Nonseparated option would assume that the Group M occupancy could occur on any of the four stories.

If the building were completely sprinklered, the allowable heights of all occupancies would be higher in accordance with Section 504. Accordingly, under Section 504, the minimum type of construction allowed for the building would be Type VA. In addition, the minimum fire-resistance rating of each floor/ceiling assembly would need to be only 1 hour, in accordance with Table 508.4.

Part B: Since each story has only one occupancy, the maximum allowable area for a story of the building can be taken directly from Table 506.2. Based on the allowable construction type determined, Type IIIB construction is acceptable for Groups B and M, but it is not acceptable for Group A-3. Based on the given area of 975 m² and without any area increases, the allowable types of construction permitted for Group A-3 based on area are Types IA, IB, IIA, IIIA, IV and VA. Although the Group A-3 story and the story below will be required to be sprinkler protected, because the whole building is not protected, area increases for sprinklers are not allowed in this example. From Part A it was determined that Type VA construction is not permitted for the height of the building due to Group B; therefore, the allowable types of construction for the building based on height and area are Types IA, IB, IIA, IIIA and IV. This conclusion is based on it being a nonsprinklered building on floors 3 and 4.

Example 2: Consider a 6855 m² building with a fire barrier wall separating a 4155 m² warehouse from a 2700 m² office space [see Commentary Figure 508.4.4.1(3)].

Step 1: The warehouse occupancy (which is also a fire area) is classified in Group S-2. The office occupancy (which is also a fire area) is classified in Group B.

Step 2: A 2-hour fire barrier is required in accordance with Table 508.4 for nonsprinklered buildings (1 hour for sprinklered buildings) between the two occupancies and extends continuously through all concealed space to the underside of the roof deck in accordance with Section 707.

Step 3: The separation required by Table 508.4 also creates two fire areas since it requires the same level of fire separation as Table 707.3.10 which is used to determine the minimum required fire area separation. The Group B area is one story and 2700 m². A sprinkler system is not required by the code for a one-story Group B fire area (unless it is an ambulatory care center). The Group S-2 fire area is 4155 m², which is also not required to have a sprinkler system. However, the designer wants to be able to utilize Type IIB construction. The tabular area for nonsprinklered buildings from Table 506.2 for Group S-2 occupancies within a Type IIB building is only 2420 m²; therefore, a sprinkler system will need to be provided to allow an increase in allowable area. For a single-story building, the allowable area for a Group S-2 building in Type IIB would then be 9670 m². To allow this increase, the entire building including

===== Page 0470 =====
both occupancies would need to be protected throughout with an NFPA 13 sprinkler system. Further, evaluate each occupancy area in the same manner for compliance with all provisions of the code.

Step 4:
Part A: The proposed building is only one story in height. Based on height, any type of construction is acceptable for the occupancies under consideration.

Part B: Make a trial evaluation of the building assuming it to be Type IIB construction:

• Actual area of Group S-2 = 4155 m² and actual area of Group B = 2700 m².

• Group S-2 maximum allowable area = 9670 m².

• The maximum allowable area for Group B = 8550 m².

• Using the sum of the ratios approach, 4155/9670 + 2700/8550 = 0.74 which does not exceed 1.0.

Therefore, Type IIB construction is an acceptable minimum type of construction. When the factor arrived at is substantially below 1.0, it indicates that the building might qualify as a lower type of construction or as Nonseparated occupancies under Section 508.3.

The building is deemed to comply with the code after each of the code requirements is satisfied, as determined by Steps 1 through 4.

In the case of multistory buildings, an evaluation of the allowable area must be performed for every story of the building that contains separated uses.

It is interesting to note that once this example building is fully protected by a sprinkler system, the concern regarding fire areas is gone and Table 508.4 states a 1-hour fire barrier is all that is required. Further, once sprinkler protected, this building would be allowed under the nonseparated option, negating the need for any rated separation wall.

Example 3: Consider a 6855 m² building identical to that used in Example 2, except that the warehouse is classified in Group S-1. The Group S-1 warehouse is 4155 m² and the Group B office space is 2700 m² [see Commentary Figure 508.4.4.1(4)].

Step 1: The warehouse is classified as Group S-1. The office is classified as Group B.

Step 2: Table 508.4 indicates that there is no separation requirement between Groups B and S-1, since they are in the same grouping of occupancies in the table.

Step 3: As there is no separation between the occupancies, there is only one fire area including both occupancies. The fire area for the occupancy of Groups B and S-1 is the entire area of the one-story building, or 6855 m². In accordance with Section 903.2.9, since the fire area containing Group S-1 is greater than 1115 m² the entire building is required to be sprinklered. Note that even if the uses were separated, Section 903.2.9 requires sprinklers throughout all buildings containing a Group S-1 fire area greater than 1115 m².

Step 4:

Part A: Based on the one-story height, any type of construction is acceptable for the occupancies under consideration.

Part B: Make a trial evaluation of the building assuming it to be Type IIB construction.

• Actual area of Group S-1 = 4155 m² and actual area of Group B = 2700 m².

• Group S-1 maximum allowable area, = 6510 m².

The maximum allowable area for Group B including allowable increases = 8550 m².

Using the sum of the ratios approach, 4155/6510 + 2700/8550 = 0.95 which does not exceed 1.0.

Note that, in this case, the separated use option requires no separation between these particular uses, and the Type IIB classification is acceptable. Comparing this to the example for Nonseparated uses, with the same dimensions of each occupancy, the Type IIB construction classification is not acceptable, and a Type IIA construction classification is required.

Since Section 508.3 (Nonseparated occupancies) makes a reference to applying the most restrictive requirements of Section 403 and Chapter 9, there may be the assumption that under the separated occupancies option, requirements can be applied separately to each occupancy in all cases. This is not completely true. There are sections of Chapter 9, such as Section 903.2.6, 903.2.8 or 903.2.9, that require sprinklers throughout the entire building when a particular occupancy is present. Some sections in Chapter 9, however, do permit separate application of requirements, even though the term "fire area" is not used. For example, a warehouse building with an office would be categorized as Groups B (office) and S-1 (warehouse). If the separated occupancies option is selected and the office has an occupant load of at least 500 people, then a fire alarm system is only required in the Group B area and not the Group S-1 area (see Section 907.2). It should be noted that alarm requirements must address the path of egress for occupants and may require notification appliances along those paths.

===== Page 0471 =====
With respect to the high-rise provisions of Section 403, the requirements generally apply throughout the building and are not specific to fire areas. There are limited provisions in Section 403 that are specific to one occupancy or another. Regardless of the option selection in a mixed occupancy building, requirements in Section 403 that are based on occupancy will need to be applied throughout the building. Another approach available to the designer of structures that contain more than one occupancy requires that the occupancies are completely separated by fire walls (see Section 706), thus creating separate buildings for each use. This is the simplest option to apply and analyze. When a fire wall is utilized, for code application purposes, two or more separate and independent buildings (see the definition of "Area, building" in Section 202) are created, and each building is reviewed individually.

508.5 Live/work units. A live/work unit shall comply with Sections 508.5 through 508.5.11.

Exception: Dwelling or sleeping units that include an office that is less than 10 percent of the area of the dwelling unit are permitted to be classified as dwelling units with accessory occupancies in accordance with Section 508.2.

These provisions allow a live/work unit that includes both living and working environments to be considered a single Group R-2 dwelling unit for application of the code. Several limitations and specific requirements are applied to both the living and work portions of the unit. Prior to the adoption of these provisions, the code and SBC 1101/1102 did not allow residential live/work units in a form that is typically desirable for community development. This concept has become increasingly popular, allowing design and construction of a public business with employees working within a residence, and allowing the public to enter the work area of the unit to acquire service. Examples of live/work commercial functions are artists' studios, beauty parlors, nail salons and chiropractors' offices. It is important to note that live/work is specifically not to apply to an in-home office. The exception to Section 508.5 is intended to address these small home offices that involve less than 10 percent of the dwelling's floor area.

These concepts reflect an era of planning that created a community where residents could walk to all needed services such as the typical corner commercial store. Examples of this form of planning can be found in many older cities, as well as many "planned communities."
Historically, building codes did not have to address many live/work issues because zoning codes generally precluded a mixing of uses within a neighborhood, much less within a building. However, recent planning trends have been adopted in many jurisdictions, encouraging mixing of commercial and residential uses, not just in neighborhoods, but also in buildings, and even within unit types, such as the live/work unit commonly found in TND projects.

The provisions for live/work units apply to the code criteria based on the Group R-2 provisions for construction. The occupant loads will be determined by the “function” of each space in accordance with Table 1004.5.

Section 508.5 allows mixed use within the dwelling unit or sleeping unit without classification as a mixed-occupancy condition as long as the unit meets the limits within this section. It is then to be classified as a Group R-2 occupancy. Special features that are common within a dwelling unit and are likely within the live/work unit are addressed in order to clearly delineate the means for designing a live/work unit.

508.5.1 Limitations. The following shall apply to live/work areas:

1 The live/work unit is permitted to be not greater than 280 m \( ^{2} \)  in area.

2 The non-residential area is permitted to be not more than 50 percent of the area of each live/work unit.

3 The non-residential area function shall be limited to the first or main floor only of the live/work unit.

4 Not more than five nonresidential workers or employees are allowed to occupy the nonresidential area at any one time.

These provisions were meant to apply strictly to small businesses associated with dwelling and sleeping units. In fact, the intent is that the main occupancy of the building is residential, with some business activity within the building. The code limits the nonresidential aspect to a maximum of 50 percent of the area of each unit. In addition, the total area of the live/work unit is limited to 280 m². Therefore, the total area of the work unit would be a maximum of 140 m². Since a nonresidential use is being located in a dwelling unit or sleeping unit, the nonresidential area is limited to the first or main floor. Therefore, those coming to the place of business do not need to enter the residential portion of the building. Finally, in keeping with the intent that these are small occupancies and that such occupancies could not create unnecessary life safety concerns, the number of nonresidential workers (employees) is

===== Page 0472 =====
limited to five. This limit of five is not the limit on the number of occupants that can be located within the work area, but simply the number of workers from outside the household that can be there on a regular basis. The 140 m \( ^{2} \)  limit on area would limit the number of occupants based on the occupant load factors.

508.5.2 Occupancies. Live/work units shall be classified as a Group R-2 occupancy. Separation requirements found in Sections 420 and 508 shall not apply within the live/work unit where the live/work unit is in compliance with Section 508.5. Nonresidential uses that would otherwise be classified as either a Group H or S occupancy shall not be permitted in a live/work unit.

Exception: Storage shall be permitted in the live/work unit provided that the aggregate area of storage in the nonresidential portion of the live/work unit shall be limited to 10 percent of the space dedicated to nonresidential activities.

The entire live/work unit is to be classified as Group R-2, regardless of the types of business being conducted. This exempts such units from the requirements for separation in Sections 420 and 508 within the unit but would still require the separation between each live/work unit.

The provisions that prohibit uses that would otherwise be classified as either Group H or S occupancies intend to avoid the accumulation of excessive and dangerous fire loads in residential related occupancies. This Section would not prohibit the occupancy from containing the maximum allowable quantities of hazardous materials per control area within a building. Control areas are regulated in Section 414 (see the commentary to that section).

Storage is a potential fire load in any business. To ensure that it does not become a large fire hazard, it is limited to 10 percent of the nonresidential portion of the live/work unit. That would be a maximum of 14 m², about the size of a large closet.

508.5.3 Means of egress. Except as modified by this section, the means of egress components for a live/work unit shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 10 for the function served.

This Section requires compliance with Chapter 10 for means of egress unless the general requirements are modified by the following two subsections. The means of egress for the nonresidential portion of the live/work unit is regulated based on the specific function of the space rather than the egress requirements for a Group R-2 occupancy. In many instances, this will require an occupancy classification determination for the nonresidential portion for means of egress purposes without assigning such a classification to the function itself. For example, where the nonresidential portion of the live/work unit is a retail sales use, that portion of the unit would be regulated as a Group M occupancy for the means of egress provisions in Chapter 10.

508.5.4 Egress capacity. The egress capacity for each element of the live/work unit shall be based on the occupant load for the function served in accordance with Table 1004.5.

The egress capacity must be based on the actual use of the space. Therefore, where you had a mercantile-type use in the live/work unit, the egress capacity must be based on  \( 5.6 \, m^2 \)  per person of the gross area of the mercantile space. Where a  \( 280 \, m^2 \)  unit is equally divided for mercantile and residential use, in such a case the calculated occupant load would be determined by dividing the area by the square meter per person:  \( 180 \, m^2/5.6 \, m^2 \)  per person = 25 occupants. In addition, the capacity for residential use is  \( 18.6 \, m^2 \)  per person (gross area), which would be  \( 140 \, m^2/18.60 \, m^2 \)  per person = 8 occupants.

508.5.5 Spiral stairways. Spiral stairways that conform to the requirements of Section 1011.10 shall be permitted.

Spiral staircases are allowed in dwelling units, and this Section simply emphasizes this allowance with a specific reference to the design criteria in Section 1011.10. There is no limit on the use of spiral stairways, regardless of the floor area of the nonresidential uses in the live/work unit.

508.5.6 Vertical openings. Floor openings between floor levels of a live/work unit are permitted without enclosure.

Within a multistory unit, openings through one or more floors created by stairways and other vertical elements need not be enclosed. This is consistent with the allowance for unconcealed vertical openings within individual residential dwelling units and sleeping units (see Sections 712.1.2 and 1009.3.2).

508.5.7 Fire protection. The live/work unit shall be provided with a monitored fire alarm system where required by Section 907.2.9 and an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.8

Since the unit is considered as Group R-2, the entire building would be required to be sprinkled in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 (NFPA 13) or 903.3.1.2 (NFPA 13R). This Section requires the installation of a fire alarm system as required for a Group R-2 occupancy. Section 907.2.9 would only require a fire alarm system in certain cases. The

===== Page 0473 =====
requirements for a manual fire alarm are based on the location of the Group R-2 dwelling unit (three or more stories above the lowest level of exit discharge or one story below the highest level of exit discharge) and the number of units (more than 16). Where a building has a sprinkler system and would require a manual system, the manual aspect is no longer required. Instead, the sprinkler system is required to be tied to the notification appliances and activate the system upon water flow.

508.5.8 Structural. Floors within a live/work unit shall be designed for the live loads in Table 1607.1, based on the function within the space.

Since live/work units may have structural loads not normally anticipated by Group R-2 occupancies, the code specifically requires structural design of floor live loads to be addressed in accordance with Table 1607.1, based on what is actually occurring in the space. For instance, where the nonresidential activity is a business, there may be equipment such as computers, files or a large copy machine that requires loading based on office loads of 4800 Pa.

508.5.9 Accessibility. Accessibility shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 11 for the function served.

Accessibility to and within the live/work unit must be designed and constructed in compliance with Chapter 11. The business/work area on the first floor must be fully accessible. In accordance with Section 1108.6.2.1, the dwelling unit portion must be evaluated separately. Where the structure has four or more units, or the site has more than 20 units, Type A unit or Type B unit requirements may be applicable. The exceptions under Section 1108.7 are applicable. The most common application will typically be the multistory dwelling unit (see Section 1108.7.2).

Section 1108.3 requires that rooms and spaces available to the public be accessible. Accessible spaces that may be utilized by the public in accordance with Section 1108.3 include other spaces such as kitchens, living and dining areas and any exterior spaces including patios, terraces and balconies that may be on the same level as the entrance to the unit. These may not be “available to the public” unless they are part of the function of the nonresidential activity. Such spaces that are strictly part of the residential function of the live/work unit are only required to be accessible to the degree that such units are required to be made accessible.

508.5.10 Ventilation. The applicable ventilation requirements of SBC 501 shall apply to each area within the live/work unit for the function within that space.

* Similar to egress and structural requirements, the use of the space must be looked at individually to ensure ventilation being provided fits the use. For instance, Table 403.3.1.1 of SBC 501 would require a florist shop to have 0.42 m³ per minute of outdoor air per person. With a possible floor area of 140 m² for the work area and a minimum of eight persons per 100 m² as required by Table 403.3.1.1, the Liters per second per square meter required would be as follows:

(8 occupants/100 m²) × 140 m² = 12 occupants
12 occupants × 0.42 m³ per minute = 5 m³ per minute of outside air ventilation

A two-bedroom dwelling unit would typically require 50 Liters per second (7 Liters per second per occupant × 7 occupants — 18.6 m² per occupant in accordance with Table 1004.5). However, it is more typical that designs of residential dwelling units include the provision of fresh air by the natural ventilation option.

508.5.11 Plumbing facilities. The nonresidential area of the live/work unit shall be provided with minimum plumbing facilities as specified by Chapter 29, based on the function of the nonresidential area. Where the nonresidential area of the live/work unit is required to be accessible by Section 1108.6.2.1, the plumbing fixtures specified by Chapter 29 shall be accessible.

In a manner consistent with the application of means of egress provisions to live/work units, plumbing facilities as specified by Chapter 29 are to be provided for the nonresidential use based on the function of the nonresidential area. Based on the example of a retail sales use as set forth in the commentary to Section 508.5.3, plumbing fixture requirements for the nonresidential retail sales area would be based on a Group M classification. However, the Group M classification would not be specifically assigned to the live/work unit. As previously stated in Section 508.5.9, the accessibility requirements for the nonresidential area would be based on the function of that area.

## SECTION 509 INCIDENTAL USES

509.1 General. Incidental uses located within single occupancy or mixed occupancy buildings shall comply with the provisions of this section. Incidental uses are ancillary functions associated with a given occupancy that generally pose a greater level of risk to that occupancy and are limited to those uses specified in Table 509.1.

Exception: Incidental uses within and serving a dwelling unit are not required to comply with this section.

===== Page 0474 =====
Incidental uses constitute special hazards or risks to life safety. Such uses or systems often pose risks that are not typically addressed by the provisions for the general occupancy groups under consideration. However, such uses and systems may functionally be an extension of the primary use. Only those uses and systems found in Table 509 are to be regulated as incidental uses. Incidental uses can be located within both single-occupancy and mixed-occupancy buildings. The concern is that those uses and systems designated as incidental uses pose a risk to the remainder of the building, and as such, some degree of protection is required. However, the protection requirements are not applicable to incidental uses that are located within and serve a dwelling unit. Incidental uses are not required to also comply with the accessory use provisions of Section 508.2.

Table 509.1 identifies incidental uses and systems and the required separation or other protection to be provided. Where a fire-resistance-rated separation is required, the incidental use or system must be in a room or space separated from other portions of the building with fire barriers that comply with Section 707 and horizontal assemblies complying with Section 711. Where Table 509.1 permits protection by an automatic sprinkler system without fire barriers, the walls enclosing the incidental use must comply with Section 509.4.2. Stationary storage battery systems were removed in the 2021 code cycle due to added protection features in SBC 801, making it unnecessary to limit such areas as an incidental use.

509.2 Occupancy classification. Incidental uses shall not be individually classified in accordance with Section 302.1. Incidental uses shall be included in the building occupancies within which they are located.

This provision expressly states that incidental uses are not considered as separate and distinct occupancy classifications, but rather are classified the same as the building occupancies in which they are located. As an example, an 18.5 m² laundry room in an apartment building would simply be classified as a part of the Group R-2 occupancy. Similarly, a waste and linen collection room in a nursing home would be classified as a portion of the Group I-2 occupancy.

509.3 Area limitations. Incidental uses shall not occupy more than 10 percent of the building area of the story in which they are located.

The floor area limitation of 10 percent for incidental uses emphasizes the ancillary nature of such systems, rooms and areas. Each incidental use is limited to a maximum of 10 percent of the floor area of the story in which it is located. Where there are two or more tenants located on the same story, the 10 percent limitation is presumably based on the floor area of each individual tenant space rather than that of the entire story. The application of the limit on a tenant-by-tenant basis is consistent with the concept of incidental uses typically being ancillary only to a portion of the building, the specific tenant occupancy.

509.4 Separation and protection. The incidental uses specified in Table 509.1 shall be separated from the remainder of the building or equipped with an automatic sprinkler system, or both, in accordance with the provisions of that table.

In addition to identifying those uses and systems that warrant regulation as incidental uses, Table 509.1 also indicates the required degree of protection or separation. The requirements identified in Table 509.1 vary depending on the incidental use. In some cases, a specific type of separation or protection is required, while in others there is an option. As indicated by Section 509.4.2.1, the requirement for an automatic sprinkler system for the majority of those listed applies only to the incidental use room or area, not the entire building. If a building is required to be provided with a sprinkler system for other reasons, then any sprinkler requirement for an incidental use or system is also met.

509.4.1 Separation. Where Table 509.1 specifies a fire-resistance-rated separation, the incidental uses shall be separated from the remainder of the building by a fire barrier constructed in accordance with Section 707 or a horizontal assembly constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. Construction supporting 1-hour fire barriers or horizontal assemblies used for incidental use separations in buildings of Type IIB, IIIB and VB construction is not required to be fire-resistance-rated unless required by other sections of this code.

Where a fire-resistance rated separation is required, the incidental use or system must be in a room or space separated from other portions of the building with fire barriers that comply with Section 707, horizontal assemblies complying with Section 711, or both. Where Table 509.1 permits protection by an automatic sprinkler system without fire barriers, the construction enclosing the incidental use must resist the passage of smoke in accordance with Section 509.4.2. Where the construction surrounding an incidental use is only required to be 1 hour, and the building is of nonrated construction (Type IIB, IIIB or VB), the rated construction does not

===== Page 0475 =====
need to be supported by 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction. In all other instances, the construction supporting incidental use separations must be supported by construction with at least the same rating as the separations.

509.4.1.1 Type IV-B and IV-C construction. Where Table 509.1 specifies a fire-resistance-rated separation, mass timber elements serving as fire barriers or horizontal assemblies in Type IV-B or IV-C construction shall be separated from the interior of the incidental use with an approved thermal barrier consisting of gypsum board that is not less than 12.5 mm in thickness or a material that is tested in accordance with and meets the acceptance criteria of both the Temperature Transmission Fire Test and the Integrity Fire Test of NFPA 275.

Specifically in Type IV-B and IV-C construction, mass timber elements used as incidental use separations must be provided with a thermal barrier on the interior side of the incidental use space, even if other Sections of this code permit these elements to be exposed.

509.4.2 Protection. Where Table 509.1 permits an automatic sprinkler system without a fire barrier, the incidental uses shall be separated from the remainder of the building by construction capable of resisting the passage of smoke. The walls shall extend from the top of the foundation or floor assembly below to the underside of the ceiling that is a component of a fire-resistance-rated floor assembly or roof assembly above or to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above. Doors shall be self- or automatic closing upon detection of smoke in accordance with Section 716.2.6.6. Doors shall not have air transfer openings and shall not be undercut in excess of the clearance permitted in accordance with NFPA 80. Walls surrounding the incidental use shall not have air transfer openings unless provided with smoke dampers in accordance with Section 710.8.

Where Table 509.1 permits protection by an automatic sprinkler system without fire barriers, the construction enclosing the incidental use must resist the passage of smoke. While this Section can be viewed as a performance standard, construction details for resisting the passage of smoke are provided in this section. Although the Section specifically states that air transfer openings must be provided with smoke dampers, it is silent with respect to ducts. If ducts are penetrating this separation, the arrangement of the duct system should be analyzed to determine if it will allow smoke to pass through the wall and not restrict it to the area containing the incidental use or system.
The wall construction described here is not required to be a smoke barrier conforming to Section 709 or a smoke partition conforming to Section 710.

509.4.2.1 Protection limitation. Where an automatic sprinkler system is provided in accordance with Table 509.1, only the space occupied by the incidental use need be equipped with such a system.

The point of this Section is that the sprinkler system stipulated in Table 509.1 is required only for the room or space containing the incidental use or system. In general, the nature of these incidental uses is such that they are small areas, not often frequented by building occupants, in which a fire could get underway and go unnoticed for a longer time than in a part of the building that is constantly occupied.

## SECTION 510 SPECIAL PROVISIONS

510.1 General. The provisions in Sections 510.2 through 510.9 shall permit the use of special conditions that are exempt from, or modify, the specific requirements of this chapter regarding the allowable building heights and areas of buildings based on the occupancy classification and type of construction, provided the special condition complies with the provisions specified in this section for such condition and other applicable requirements of this code. The provisions of Sections 510.2 through 510.8 are to be considered independent and separate from each other.

The subsections of Section 510 are exceptions to the general height and area limitations of Chapter 5. Most of the subsections address attached parking structures and contain conditions by which these can be attached to buildings without creating hardship with regard to allowable area and height for the building. These allowances are not always related to buildings containing parking below but can involve other uses and occupancies. Also many of these scenarios will be applied such that there may be multiple buildings above the parking garage.

510.2 Horizontal building separation allowance. A building shall be considered as separate and distinct buildings for the purpose of determining area limitations, continuity of fire walls, limitation of number of stories and type of construction where the following conditions are met:

1 The buildings are separated with a horizontal assembly having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 3 hours. Where vertical offsets are provided as part of a horizontal assembly, the vertical offset and the structure

===== Page 0476 =====
supporting the vertical offset shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than 3 hours.

2 The building below, including the horizontal assembly, is of Type IA construction.

3 Shaft, stairway, ramp and escalator enclosures through the horizontal assembly shall have not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance rating with opening protectives in accordance with Section 716.

Exception: Where the enclosure walls below the horizontal assembly have not less than a 3-hour fire-resistance rating with opening protectives in accordance with Section 716, the enclosure walls extending above the horizontal assembly shall be permitted to have a 1-hour fire-resistance rating, provided that the following conditions are met:

1. The building above the horizontal assembly is not required to be of Type I construction.

2. The enclosure connects fewer than four stories.

3. The enclosure opening protectives above the horizontal assembly have a fire protection rating of not less than 1 hour.

4 Interior exit stairways located within the Type IA building are permitted to be of combustible materials where both of the following requirements are met:

4.1 The building above the Type IA building is of Type III, IV, or V construction.

4.2 The stairway located in the Type IA building is enclosed by 3-hour fire-resistance rated construction with opening protectives in accordance with Section 716.

5 The building or buildings above the horizontal assembly shall be permitted to have multiple Group A occupancy uses, each with an occupant load of less 300, or Group B, M, R or S occupancies.

6 The building below the horizontal assembly shall be protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and shall be permitted to be any occupancy allowed by this code except Group H.

7 The maximum building height in mm shall not exceed the limits set forth in Section 504.3 for the building having the smaller allowable height as measured from the grade plane.
Section 510.2 essentially allows a 3-hour fire-resistance-rated horizontal assembly to create separate buildings similar to the concept used for fire walls (see Commentary Figure 510.2). However, consideration as separated buildings by this method is only applicable to a limited number of specified conditions. This allowance provides an extensive benefit for height and area in these structures. Buildings constructed under this Section are frequently referred to as "pedestal," "podium" or "platform" buildings. It should be noted that multiple buildings may be located above the horizontal assembly. Structures built under this Section are considered to be distinct buildings above and below the 3-hour fire-resistance-rated horizontal assembly. As distinct buildings, they are individually evaluated with respect to allowable building area, the number of stories and the type of construction. In addition, if a fire wall is needed to address building area issues in the upper building or buildings, the fire wall construction can stop at the 3-hour fire-resistance-rated horizontal assembly and does not need to extend to the foundation. However, other building systems and requirements must be evaluated using the total structure. For example, if the upper building is apartments and the lower building an open parking garage, both buildings will need to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system because of the requirement for buildings occupied by Group R occupancies (see Section 903.2.8). For covered and open mall buildings, Section 402 gives specific provisions for separation from Group S-2 open parking garages (Section 402.4.2.3), which additionally exempts sprinklers from such open parking garages (Section 402.5 exception).

There are seven conditions that set the limits of this design:

1 Separation of upper and lower buildings by a 3-hour fire-resistance-rated horizontal assembly. This otherwise horizontal separation can have vertical offsets. Such offsets can be used to facilitate designs for hillside locations, allowing a building to stairstep down the slope. There may be other reasons why a designer may want part of the lower building to be two stories and part of it only a single story. The offset will allow such designs.

2 The building below the horizontal assembly is of Type IA construction. As such it is allowed to be of unlimited area in accordance with Section 506. The three-hour assembly required between the lower and upper buildings is also to be of Type IA construction.

===== Page 0477 =====
3 All openings through the 3-hour fire-resistance-rated horizontal assembly are to be protected by a 2-hour shaft [the shaft openings having 11/2-hour protectives, see Table 716.1(2)].

4 The construction of interior exit stairways may be of combustible materials within the Type IA building only if the upper building is of Type III, IV or V construction and is protected by 3-hour fire-rated assemblies with protected openings within the Type IA building. It was reasoned to be impractical to require a transition from combustible to noncombustible materials in the enclosure where the stairways go from the building above to the Type IA noncombustible building below.

5 The uses of the upper building or buildings are limited to Group B, M, R and S occupancies and to Group A occupancies where each individual Group A use has an occupant load of less than 300.

The limit of 300 occupants in Group A occupancies is also reflective of the history of these provisions from the legacy codes, and the intent of restricting the assembly spaces to smaller businesses so that the assembly use does not dominate the upper building. This same limit for assembly is not applied to the lower building.

6 The building below is allowed to be any occupancy or any combination of occupancies except Group H. The lower building must be equipped throughout with an NFPA 13 sprinkler system. While historic versions of Section 510.2 limited the use of the lower building to parking, the provision has evolved to reflect a mixed occupancy setting of urban neighborhoods.

7 The height of the combined buildings above and below the horizontal assembly is limited to the number of meter above grade plane allowed by Section 504.3 for the type of construction of the upper building. However, the charging language of Section 510.2 does not restrict the number of stories to the entire structure but only to that which is above the horizontal assembly. Thus, a Type VA building, protected by an NFPA 13R sprinkler system and containing a Group R-2 occupancy, can have four stories above the horizontal assembly, provided that the overall height of both buildings does not exceed 18 m above grade plane.

This is one of the rare circumstances where the code allows two different construction types in a single structure without being separated by a fire wall. It is possible that following the conventional provisions for mixed occupancies in Sections 508.3 and 508.4 would be less restrictive than the conditions of this section. Compliance with the general provisions of Section 508.3 or 508.4 is permissible, and this Section should be viewed as an alternative means of compliance with Section 508.3 or 508.4.

There is one exception within the seven items: the exception to Item 3 indicates the conditions by which the shaft construction protecting openings in the horizontal separation may be 1-hour rated above the horizontal separation. This allowance is only for openings connecting a maximum of four stories. This would include the connection to the area below the horizontal assembly (see Commentary Figure 510.2).

A common example of a building constructed under the provisions of Section 510.2 is a Type IA building that contains parking at and below grade level, with up to four stories of Group R-2 apartments in a Type VA, wood-frame constructed building above the separation (see Commentary Figure 510.2). In many city neighborhoods where zoning laws encourage a mixture of uses, the first story is often occupied with retail shops, service businesses and small restaurants. The height of this structure measured in meters is limited by the Type VA upper structure to a maximum of 21 m above grade plane where a full NFPA 13 sprinkler system is provided, or 18 m where only an NFPA 13R system is used. But the number of stories of the Type VA portion of the building is determined by starting at the horizontal separation between the construction types. See also Section 510.9 for where there are multiple buildings above the horizontal separation.

510.3 Group S-2 enclosed parking garage with Group S-2 open parking garage above. A Group S-2 enclosed parking garage with not more than one story above grade plane and located below a Group S-2 open parking garage shall be classified as a separate and distinct building for the purpose of determining the type of construction where the following conditions are met:

1 The allowable area of the building shall be such that the sum of the ratios of the actual area divided by the allowable area for each separate occupancy shall not exceed 1.

2 The Group S-2 enclosed parking garage is of Type I or II construction and is at least equal to the fire-resistance requirements of the Group S-2 open parking garage.

3 The height and the number of tiers of the Group S-2 open parking garage shall be limited as specified in Table 406.5.4.

===== Page 0478 =====
4 The floor assembly separating the Group S-2 enclosed parking garage and Group S-2 open parking garage shall be protected as required for the floor assembly of the Group S-2 enclosed parking garage. Openings between the Group S-2 enclosed parking garage and Group S-2 open parking garage, except exit openings, shall not be required to be protected.

5 The Group S-2 enclosed parking garage is used exclusively for the parking or storage of private motor vehicles, but shall be permitted to contain an office, waiting room and toilet room having a total area of not more than 100 m² and mechanical equipment rooms associated with the operation of the building.

Parking garages of both types, enclosed and open, are addressed in Section 406. Special height and area allowances are given in Section 406.5.4 for open parking structures. However, these special height and area provisions are not applicable if any level of the parking garage does not meet the definition of "Open parking garage" by not having the requisite clear open area in the exterior walls. This would normally preclude having parking levels below grade in an open parking garage. Section 510.3 contains provisions that would allow an open parking structure to take advantage of the special height and area limits for open parking structures in Section 406.5.4 while incorporating, in the same building, enclosed parking levels below grade. This is an alternative to treating the whole building as an enclosed parking garage.

There are five conditions listed that must be met in order to use this alternative:

Appropriate increases in accordance with Section 506 are to be considered for each portion, and for purposes of frontage increase the same measurement of open perimeter may apply to both the upper and lower garages.

2 The enclosed parking structure below must meet or exceed the fire resistance of the open parking structure above. At a minimum, the enclosed parking structure must be of Type IIB construction (all noncombustible materials, without fire resistance-rated protection). However, if the open parking structure above is Type VA, IIIA, IIA or IA, the enclosed parking structure would also have to meet or exceed the required ratings of the building elements from Table 601 for the construction type of the open parking structure.

3 Both the entire height of the building and the number of tiers are limited by Table 406.5.4. Therefore, even if the first story above grade is part of the enclosed parking garage portion of the building, the height of the structure above grade plane could not exceed what would be permitted by Table 406.5.4 if the entire structure above grade plane were part of the open parking garage portion.

4 Protection of the floor assembly of the Group S-2 building depends on the construction type and Table 601 for the S-2 enclosed parking garage.

5 Certain uses are permitted to be present when taking advantage of these alternative provisions, such as a small office and waiting area.

See also Section 510.9 for where there are multiple buildings above the horizontal separation.

510.4 Parking beneath Group R. Where a maximum one story above grade plane Group S-2 parking garage, enclosed or open, or combination thereof, of Type I construction or open of Type IV construction, with grade entrance, is provided under a building of Group R, the number of stories to be used in determining the minimum type of construction shall be measured from the floor above such a parking area. The floor assembly between the parking garage and the Group R above shall comply with the type of construction required for the parking garage and shall also provide a fire resistance rating not less than the mixed occupancy separation required in Section 508.4.

This Section permits an extra story (above the limits of Table 504.4), based on construction type, for Group R buildings with parking on the first story (see Commentary Figure 510.4). There are several conditions that must be met: the parking must be limited to one story above grade; the parking structure must be of Type IV (if open) or Type I (open or enclosed) construction; the entrance to the garage must be at grade; and the horizontal assembly separation between the parking and the Group R occupancy shall have a fire-resistance rating in accordance with Table 508.4 for occupancy separation or in accordance with Table 601 for building elements, whichever is greater. The limitation of Table 504.3 for height above grade plane (in meter) is not changed under this circumstance.

For instance, a fully sprinkled Group R-2 building of Type VB construction would normally be permitted to be three stories above grade plane (Table 504.4 for R-2, "S"). If it meets the conditions of this Section for parking on the first story above grade plane, then the allowed third story of the Group R-2 building would actually be four stories above grade plane. However, the building height in meter cannot exceed 18 m above grade plane in

===== Page 0479 =====
accordance with Table 504.3 for Type VB construction. Commentary Figure 510.4 provides an example of a Group R-1 building over enclosed parking.

510.5 Group R-1 and R-2 buildings of Type IIIA construction. For buildings of Type IIIA construction in Groups R-1 and R-2, the maximum allowable height in Table 504.3 shall be increased by 3 m and the maximum allowable number of stories in Table 504.4 shall be increased by one where the first-floor assembly above the basement has a fire-resistance rating of not less than 3 hours and the floor area is subdivided by 2-hour fire-resistance-rated fire walls into areas of not more than 279 m².

This Section contains special provisions for increasing the allowable height by 3 m and the allowable stories by one for Type IIIA, Group R-1 and R-2 buildings based on increases in fire resistance and compartmentation. More specifically, the higher rating would apply to the floor structure of the first story above grade (3 hours), and the fire walls (2 hours) subdividing the building into floor areas of not more than 279 m². The fire walls must extend from foundation to roof. In addition, the fire walls must comply with the requirements in Section 706.

It should be noted that this Section is independent of the fire area requirements of Section 901.7, but such separations could certainly be considered as creating fire areas or separate buildings. In either case, all buildings containing a Group R-1 or R-2 fire area would require sprinkler protection in accordance with Section 903.2.8.

This Section constitutes a trade-off of building area for extra height and depends on the materials and rating requirements for Type IIIA construction, as well as the extra fire resistance of the first story.

See Commentary Figure 510.5 for an example of a Type IIIA building height increase for a Group R-2 occupancy.

510.6 Group R-1 and R-2 buildings of Type IIA construction. The height limitation for buildings of Type IIA construction in Groups R-1 and R-2 shall be increased to nine stories and 30 m where the building is separated by not less than 15 m from any other building on the lot and from lot lines, the exits are segregated in an area enclosed by a 2-hour fire-resistance-rated fire wall and the first floor assembly has a fire-resistance rating of not less than  \( 1\frac{1}{2} \)  hours.

This Section contains special provisions for increasing the height of Type IIA, Group R-1 and R-2 buildings. The higher  \( 1\frac{1}{2} \) -hour rating would apply to the floor assembly of the first story above grade, and the exits are required to be enclosed with fire walls extending from foundation to roof, otherwise meeting all the requirements of Section 706.

A separation distance of at least 15 m from other buildings on the same lot or property lines is also required to use this alternative. This Section allows extra building height where exits are given protection and depends also on the materials and rating requirements for Type IIA construction, as well as the extra fire-resistance rating protecting the first story from the basement. The entire building must be sprinkled, in accordance with Section 903.2.8, with an NFPA 13 sprinkler system. See Commentary Figure 510.6 for an example of a Type IIA building height increase for a Group R-2 occupancy.

Note that such buildings will likely be considered high-rise buildings and, as such, also must comply with Section 403.
510.7 Open parking garage beneath Groups A, I, B, M and R. Open parking garages constructed under Groups A, I, B, M and R shall not exceed the height and area limitations permitted under Section 406.5. The height and area of the portion of the building above the open parking garage shall not exceed the limitations in Section 503 for the upper occupancy. The height, in both meter and stories, of the portion of the building above the open parking garage shall be measured from grade plane and shall include both the open parking garage and the portion of the building above the parking garage.

This Section addresses a special mixed-use condition and is another circumstance wherein a building can be designated with two different types of construction for determining height and area. This provision is only applicable where an open parking structure (Group S-2) is constructed below a Group A, I, B, M or R occupancy (see Commentary Figure 510.7). If an open parking structure is located below any other occupancy group, Section 508 must be applied, as for any other mixed-use condition. In accordance with Section 510.1, this Section is an alternative to the general mixed-occupancy provisions in Section 508 that can be applied where advantageous to the design of buildings with open parking on the lower levels.

In the application of Section 510.7, there are two criteria that must be met for code compliance (see Commentary Figure 510.7):
1 The height (measured both in meter and stories) and area of the open parking structure comprising a part of a mixed-use group building must not exceed the limitations for open parking structures

===== Page 0480 =====
permitted in Section 406.5.4 and Table 406.5.4.

2 The allowable height of the occupancy located above the open parking structure is to be determined in accordance with Section 504. The height is the vertical distance (measured both in meter and stories) from the grade plane to the top of the average height of the highest roof surface, in accordance with the definition of "Height, building" in Section 202.

510.7.1 Fire separation. Fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 between the parking occupancy and the upper occupancy shall correspond to the required fire-resistance rating prescribed in Table 508.4 for the uses involved. The type of construction shall apply to each occupancy individually, except that structural members, including main bracing within the open parking structure, which is necessary to support the upper occupancy, shall be protected with the more restrictive fire-resistance-rated assemblies of the groups involved as shown in Table 601. Means of egress for the upper occupancy shall conform to Chapter 10 and shall be separated from the parking occupancy by fire barriers having not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance rating as required by Section 707 with self-closing doors complying with Section 716 or horizontal assemblies having not less than a 2-hour fire-resistance rating as required by Section 711, with self-closing doors complying with Section 716. Means of egress from the open parking garage shall comply with Section 406.5.

This section contains additional conditions for the use of Section 510.7 as an alternative to the general mixed-use provisions in Section 508. It contains an additional five criteria:

1 The open parking structure and occupancy located above must be separated, both horizontally and vertically if necessary, by fire separation assemblies having a fire-resistance rating corresponding to that specified in Table 508.4.

Example: An open parking structure, Group S-2, is located below an office (Group B); therefore, based on Table 508.4, all vertical and horizontal assemblies separating the two groups are required to have a minimum fire-resistance rating of 2 hours in a nonsprinklered building and 1 hour in a sprinklered building.

2 The upper and lower portions of the building may be of different types of construction (except as discussed in Item 5 below). The minimum type of construction for an open parking structure is Type IIB or IV, depending on the thresholds established in Table 406.5.4.

Example: The open parking structure may be of Type IIB construction, and the offices located above the open parking structure may be of Type IB construction.

3 Regardless of the construction types being used, all structural members, including main bracing in the open parking structure for the stability of the upper occupancy, must be rated in accordance with the most restrictive fire resistance-rating requirement in accordance with Table 601, which would be that for Type IB construction.

Example: Consider a building where the upper occupancy is of Type IB protected construction, and the open parking structure is of Type IIB unprotected construction. In accordance with Table 601, all load-bearing walls and structural frames, including columns and girders necessary to support the upper occupancy, must have at least a 2-hour fire-resistance rating, in accordance with the requirements of Type IB construction. This typically applies to the columns and bracing in the entire structure, beams supporting the floor separating the upper occupancy from the open parking structure and any transfer beams located in the open parking structure. The story of the open parking structure and any members supporting these stories, however, are permitted to have a zero fire-resistance rating in accordance with the requirements for Type IIB construction.

4 Means of egress facilities within and from the upper occupancy are to conform to Chapter 10. In addition, the egress facilities from the upper occupancy must be separated from the parking area by fire-resistance-rated wall assemblies of at least 2 hours, by fire barriers meeting the requirements of Section 707 or horizontal assemblies meeting Section 711. These egress facilities are required to maintain the 2-hour protection for their full height and must be continuous to the level of exit discharge. The fire-resistance rating reduction of interior exit stairways for structures less than four stories in height (see Section 1023.2) is not applicable to an exit passing through the open parking structure in accordance with this section. Door openings to the interior exit stairway must have self-closing doors that comply with Section 716, with a fire protection rating of 1.5 hours in accordance with Table 716.1(2).

5 Means of egress facilities within and from the open parking structure are to conform to

===== Page 0481 =====
Section 406.5.7, which also references Chapter 10.

510.8 Group B or M buildings with Group S-2 open parking garage above. Group B or M occupancies located below a Group S-2 open parking garage of a lesser type of construction shall be considered as a separate and distinct building from the Group S-2 open parking garage for the purpose of determining the type of construction where the following conditions are met:

1 The buildings are separated with a horizontal assembly having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours.

2 The occupancies in the building below the horizontal assembly are limited to Groups B and M.

3 The occupancy above the horizontal assembly is limited to a Group S-2 open parking garage.

4 The building below the horizontal assembly is of Type IA construction.

Exception: The building below the horizontal assembly shall be permitted to be of Type IB or II construction, but not less than the type of construction required for the Group S-2 open parking garage above, where the building below is not greater than one story in height above grade plane.

5 The height and area of the building below the horizontal assembly does not exceed the limits set forth in Section 503.

6 The height and area of the Group S-2 open parking garage does not exceed the limits set forth in Section 406.5. The height, in both meter and stories, of the Group S-2 open parking garage shall be measured from grade plane and shall include the building below the horizontal assembly.

7 Exits serving the Group S-2 open parking garage shall discharge at grade with direct and unobstructed access to a street or public way and are separated from the building below the horizontal assembly by 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or 2-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both.

This section addresses the inverse of the other circumstances in Section 510: the parking, which must be an open parking garage, is located above the other groups, in this case, Group B or M. This is a common type of construction in metropolitan areas. The parking garage is an open parking structure, with developers using the street level part of the building as an opportunity to provide retail space or other commercial space in a downtown application. The conditions under which this configuration of parking garage and Group B or M uses is similar to conditions for other circumstances is found in Section 510.

More specifically, there are seven criteria that

must be met.

must be met.
Similar to Item 1 of Section 510.2, a horizontal separation is required to essentially divide the buildings into separate buildings. Again, it is like having a horizontal wall. The separation is only required to be 2 hours, which is less than the 3 hours required by Item 1 of Section 510.2.

2 The occupancies below the separation are limited to Groups B and M.

3 The occupancy above the horizontal assembly is limited to a Group S-2 open parking garage.

4 The building below is required to be of Type IA construction. The exception allows for Type IB or II construction if the building below is only one story, provided that the construction type must always be at least that of the Group S-2 above.

5 The Group B and M occupancies must comply with the height (measured in meter and stories) and area requirements of Section 503. As written, this would allow increases in area and height as appropriate.

6 The height (measured in tiers) and area of the Group S-2 occupancy shall not exceed that of Section 406.5. In addition, the overall height (measured meter and stories) is further restricted by the fact that the occupancies below the horizontal assembly must be included.

7 Lastly, similar to Section 510.7.1, the exits from the Group S-2 must be protected within 2-hour fire barriers or horizontal assemblies from the building below and be provided with an unobstructed access from the discharge to a street or public way.

See Commentary Figure 510.8 for an application of this section. See also Section 510.9 for where there are multiple buildings above the horizontal separation.

510.9 Multiple buildings above a horizontal assembly. Where two or more buildings are provided above the horizontal assembly separating a Group S-2 parking garage or building below from the buildings above in accordance with the special provisions in Section 510.2, 510.3 or 510.8, the buildings above the horizontal assembly shall be regarded as separate and distinct buildings from each other and shall comply with all other provisions of this code as applicable to each separate and distinct building.

===== Page 0482 =====
A very common practice where applying alternatives such as those found in Sections 510.2 and 510.3 is to have multiple buildings above the horizontal assemblies. Specifically, the concept in Section 510.2 is often called a "pedestal" building. In other words, the building below and including the horizontal assembly creates a "pedestal" on top of which many buildings, which are considered separate from one another, can be located. This section is simply clarifying that the multiple buildings located on top of the pedestal are considered separate from one another. This can be realized by there being multiple and distinct structures separated by yards or courts between different structures or can be the result of the use of fire walls dividing a single structure into multiple buildings.

Similar to distinct buildings sitting on the ground, multiple buildings above the horizontal assemblies can be of different construction types from the pedestal building and of different construction types from each other (see Commentary Figure 510.9). This allowance is also applicable where Section 510.8 is utilized.

===== Page 0483 =====
## TABLES AND FIGURES OF CHAPTER 5

TABLE 504.3

ALLOWABLE BUILDING HEIGHT IN METERS ABOVE GRADE PLANE \( ^{a} \)

<table><td rowspan="3">OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION<td colspan="12">TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION<td rowspan="2">SEE FOOTNOTES<td colspan="3">TYPE I<td colspan="3">TYPE II<td colspan="3">TYPE III<td colspan="2">TYPE IVTYPE VABABABABCHTAB<td rowspan="2">A, B, E, F, M, S, UNSbUL4819.516.519.516.519.519.519.519.51512SUL5425.52325.523815425.525.52118<td rowspan="2">H-1, H-2, H-3, H-5NSc,dUL4819.516.519.516.5362719.519.51512SUL5425.52325.523423025.525.52118<td rowspan="2">H-4NSc,dUL4819.516.519.516.519.519.519.519.51512SUL5425.52325.523543625.525.52118<td rowspan="2">I-1 Condition 1, I-3NSd,eUL4819.516.519.516.519.519.519.519.51512SUL5425.52325.523543625.525.52118<td rowspan="2">I-1 Condition 2, I-2NSd,eUL4819.516.519.516.519.519.519.519.51512SUL5425.52325.523543625.525.52118<td rowspan="2">I-4NSd,gUL4819.516.519.516.519.519.519.519.51512SUL5425.52325.523543625.525.52118<td rowspan="3">RhNSdUL4819.516.519.516.519.519.519.519.51512S13D181818181818181818181818S13R181818181818181818181818SUL5425.52325.523815425.525.52118</table>

Note: UL = Unlimited; NS = Buildings not equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system; S = Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1; S13R = Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2.

S13D = Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 a. See Chapter 4 and 5 for specific exceptions to the allowable height in this chapter.

b. See Section 903.2 for the minimum thresholds for protection by an automatic sprinkler system for specific occupancies.

c. New Group H occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.5.

d. The NS value is only for use in evaluation of existing building height in accordance with SBC 901.

e. New Group I-1 and I-3 occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6. For new Group I-1 occupancies Condition 1, see Exception 1 of Section 903.2.6.

f. New and existing Group I-2 occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6 and Section 1103.5 of SBC 801.

g. For new Group I-4 occupancies, see Exceptions 2 and 3 of Section 903.2.6.

h. New Group R occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.8.

===== Page 0484 =====
TABLE 504.4

ALLOWABLE NUMBER OF STORIES ABOVE GRADE PLANE \( ^{a,b} \)

<table><td rowspan="3">OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION<td colspan="13">TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION<td rowspan="2">SEE FOOTNOTES<td colspan="4">TYPE I<td colspan="3">TYPE II<td colspan="5">TYPE IIIABABABABCHTABA-1NSUL53232333321SUL64343964432

===== Page 0485 =====
a. See Chapter 4 and 5 for specific exceptions to the allowable height in this chapter.

b. See Section 903.2 for the minimum thresholds for protection by an automatic sprinkler system for specific occupancies.
c. New Group H occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.5.

d. The NS value is only for use in evaluation of existing building height in accordance with SBC 901.

e. New Group I-1 and I-3 occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6. For new Group I-1 occupancies, Condition 1, see Exception 1 of Section 903.2.6.

f. New and existing Group I-2 occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6 and Section 1103.5 of SBC 801.

g. For new Group I-4 occupancies, see Exceptions 2 and 3 of Section 903.2.6.

h. New Group R occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.8.

===== Page 0486 =====
TABLE 506.2 a,b

ALLOWABLE AREA FACTOR ( \( A_{T} = NS, S1, S13R, OR SM, AS APPLICABLE) \)  IN SQUARE METERS

<table><td rowspan="3">OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION<td rowspan="3">SEE FOOTNOTES<td colspan="12">TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION<td colspan="2">TYPE I<td colspan="2">TYPE II<td colspan="2">TYPE III<td colspan="2">TYPE IV<td colspan="4">TYPE VABABABABCHTAB<td rowspan="3">A-1NSULUL1,4407901,3007904,1802,7861,7401,3901,070510S1ULUL5,7603,1605,2003,16016,72011,1506,9705,5804,2802,040SMULUL4,3202,3703,9002,37012,5408,3605,2254,1803,2101,530<td rowspan="3">A-2NSULUL1,4408801,3008804,1802,7861,7401,3901,070560S1ULUL5,7603,5305,2003,53016,72011,1506,9705,5804,2802,230SMULUL4,3202,6503,9002,65012,5408,3605,2254,1803,2101,670<td rowspan="3">A-3NSULUL1,4408801,3008804,1802,7861,7401,3901,070560S1ULUL5,7603,5305,2003,53016,72011,1506,9705,5804,2802,230SMULUL4,3202,6503,9002,65012,5408,3605,2254,1803,2101,670<td rowspan="3">A-4NSULUL1,4408801,3008804,1802,7861,7401,3901,070560S1ULUL5,7603,5305,2003,53016,72011,1506,9705,5804,2802,230SMULUL4,3202,6503,9002,65012,5408,3605,2254,1803,2101,670<td rowspan="3">A-5NSULUL1,4408801,3008804,1802,7861,7401,3901,070560S1ULUL5,7603,5305,2003,53016,72011,1506,9705,5804,2802,230SMULUL4,3202,6503,9002,65012,5408,3605,2254,1803,2101,670<td rowspan="3">A-5NSULUL1,4408801,3008804,1802,7861,7401,3901,070560S1ULUL5,7603,5305,2003,53016,72011,1506,9705,5804,2802,230SMULUL4,3202,6503,9002,65012,5408,3605,2254,1803,2101,670<td rowspan="3">BNSULUL1,4408801,3008804,1802,7861,7401,3901,070560S1ULUL5,7603,5305,2003,53016,72011,1506,9705,5804,2802,230SMULUL4,3202,6503,9002,65012,5408,3605,2254,1803,2101,670<td rowspan="3">ENSULUL1,4408801,3008804,1802,7861,7401,3901,070560S1ULUL5,7603,5305,2003,53016,72011,1506,9705,5804,2802,230SMULUL4,3202,6503,9002,65012,5408,3605,2254,1803,2101,670<td rowspan="3">F-1NSULUL1,4408801,3008804,1802,7861,7401,3901,070560S1ULUL5,7603,5305,2003,53016,72011,1506,9705,5804,2802,230SMULUL4,3202,6503,9002,65012,5408,3605,2254,1803,2101,670<td rowspan="3">F-2NSULUL1,4408801,3008804,1802,7861,7401,3901,070560S1ULUL5,7603,5305,2003,53016,72011,1506,9705,5804,2802,230SMULUL4,3202,6503,9002,65012,5408,3605,2254,1803,2101,670<td rowspan="3">F-2NSULUL1,4408801,3008804,1802,7861,7401,3901,070560S1ULUL5,7603,5305,2003,53016,72011,1506,9705,5804,2802,230SMULUL4,3202,6503,9002,65012,5408,3605,2254,1803,2101,670<td rowspan="3">H-1NSULUL1,4408801,3008804,1802,7861,7401,3901,070560S1ULUL5,7603,5305,2003,53016,72011,1506,9705,5804,2802,230SMULUL4,3202,6503,9002,65012,5408,3605,2254,1803,2101,670<td rowspan="3">H-2NSULUL1,4408801,3008804,1802,7861,7401,3901,070560S1ULUL5,7603,5305,2003,53016,72011,1506,9705,5804,2802,230SMULUL4,3202,6503,9002,65012,5408,3605,2254,1803,2101,670<td rowspan="3">H-3NSULUL1,4408801,3008804,1802,7861,7401,3901,070560S1ULUL5,7603,5305,2003,53016,72011,1506,9705,5804,2802,230SMULUL4,3202,6503,9002,65012,5408,3605,2254,1803,2101,670<td rowspan="3">H-4NSULUL1,4408801,3008804,1802,7861,7401,3901,070560S1ULUL5,7603,5305,2003,53016,72011,1506,970

===== Page 0487 =====
TABLE 506.2 a,b

ALLOWABLE AREA FACTOR (AT = NS, S1, S13R, OR SM, AS APPLICABLE) IN SQUARE METERS (CONTINUED)

<table><td rowspan="3">OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION<td rowspan="3">SEE FOOTNOTES<td colspan="12">TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION<td colspan="3">TYPE I<td colspan="3">TYPE II<td colspan="3">TYPE III<td colspan="3">TYPE IVABABABABCHTAB<td rowspan="3">I-4NSd,eUL56202,4601,2102,1801,2107,1104,7502,1852,3701,720840S1UL11,2509,8504,8308,7404,83028,45018,9609,5009,4806,8803,350SMUL16,8707,3903,6206,5503,62021,32514,2207,1107,1105,1602,510<td rowspan="3">MNSULUL2,0001,1601,7201,1605,7153,8102,5751,9101,300840S1ULUL7,9904,6506,8804,65022,86015,2509,5257,6205,2003,350SMULUL5,9903,4905,1603,49017,15011,4507,1505,7203,9002,510<td rowspan="3">R-1hNSdULUL2,2301,4902,2301,4905,7153,8102,5751,9101,120650S13RULUL8,9205,9508,9205,95022,86015,2509,5257,6204,4602,600SMULUL6,6904,4606,6904,46017,15011,4507,1505,7203,3501,950<td rowspan="3">R-2hNSdULUL2,2301,4902,2301,4905,7153,8102,5751,9101,120650S13RULUL8,9205,9508,9205,95022,86015,2509,5257,6204,4602,600SMULUL6,6904,4606,6904,46017,15011,4507,1505,7203,3501,950<td rowspan="3">R-3hNSdULULULULULULULULULULULULS13DULULULULULULULULULULULULS13RULULULULULULULULULULULUL<td rowspan="3">R-4hNSdULULULULULULULULULULULULS13DULUL2,2301,4902,2301,4905,7153,8102,5751,9101,120650S13RULUL8,9205,9508,9205,95022,86015,2509,5257,6204,4602,600<td rowspan="3">S-1SMULUL6,6904,4606,6904,46017,15011,4507,1505,7203,3501,950NSUL4,4602,4201,6302,4201,6307,1104,7502,9752,3701,300840S1UL17,8409,6706,5108,48018,96011,8509,4805,2003,3503,3503,350<td rowspan="3">S-2SMUL13,3807,2504,8807,2504,88021,32514,2208,8907,1103,9002,510NSUL7,3403,6202,4203,6202,42010,7507,1504,4753,5801,9501,250S1UL29,37014,5009,67014,5009,67042,95028,62517,89014,3107,8105,020<td rowspan="3">USMUL22,03010,8707,25010,8707,25032,20021,47013,42010,7305,8603,760NSUL3,3001,7707901,3007905,0203,3502,1001,670840510S1UL13,2007,0603,1605,2003,16020,07513,3808,3706,6903,3502,040SMUL9,9005,3002,3703,9002,37015,05010,0506,2755,0202,5101,530</table>

Note: UL = Unlimited; NP = Not permitted; NS = Buildings not equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system; S1 = Buildings a maximum of one story above grade plane equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1; SM = Buildings two or more stories above grade plane equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1; S13R = Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2. S13D = Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3.

a. See Chapter 4 and 5 for specific exceptions to the allowable height in this chapter.

b. See Section 903.2 for the minimum thresholds for protection by an automatic sprinkler system for specific occupancies.

c. New Group H occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.5.

d. The NS value is only for use in evaluation of existing building area in accordance with SBC 901.

e. New Group I-1 and I-3 occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6. For new Group I-1 occupancies, Condition 1, see Exception 1 of Section 903.2.6.

f. New and existing Group I-2 occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.6 and Section 1103.5 of SBC 801.

g. New Group I-4 occupancies see Exceptions 2 and 3 of Section 903.2.6.

h. New Group R occupancies are required to be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.2.8.

i. The maximum allowable area for a single story non-sprinklered Group U greenhouse is permitted to be  \( 435 \, m^{2} \)  or shall be permitted to comply with Table C102.1 of Appendix C in this code.

===== Page 0488 =====
TABLE 506.3.3

FRONTAGE INCREASE FACTOR \( ^{a} \)

<table><td rowspan="2">PERCENTAGE PERIMETER<td rowspan="2">OF<td rowspan="2">BUILDING<td colspan="4">OPEN SPACE (m)0 to less than 66 to less than 7.57.5 to less than 99 or greater0 to less than 250000025 to less than 5000.170.210.2550 to less than 7500.330.420.5075 to 10000.500.630.75</table>

TABLE 506.3.3.1

SECTION 507 BUILDINGS \( ^{a} \)

<table><td rowspan="2">PERCENTAGE BUILDING PERIMETER<td colspan="8">OPEN SPACE (meters)OF9 to less than 10.510.5 to less than 1212 to less than 13.513.5 to less than 1515 to less than 16.516.5 to less than 180 to less than 25000000025 to less than 500.290.330.380.420.460.5050 to less than 750.580.670.750.830.921.0075 to 1000.881.001.131.251.381.50</table>

TABLE 508.4

REQUIRED SEPARATION OF OCCUPANCIES (HOURS) \( ^{f} \)

<table><td rowspan="2">OCCUPANCY<td rowspan="2">A,E<td colspan="2">I-1a, I-3, I-4<td colspan="2">I-2<td colspan="2">Ra<td colspan="2">F-2, S-2b, U<td colspan="2">Be, F-1, M, S-1<td colspan="2">H-1<td colspan="2">H-2<td colspan="2">H-3, H-4<td colspan="2">H-5SNSSNSSNSSNSSNSSNSSNSSNSSA,ENN122NP12N112NPNP34232I-1a, I-3, I-412NN2NP1NP1212NPNP3NP2NP2I-22NP2NPNN2NP2NP2NPNPNP3NP2NP2Ra121NP2NPNN1c2c12NPNP3NP2NP2F-2, S-2b, UN1122NP1c2cNN12NPNP34232Be, F-1, M, S-112122NP1212NNNPNP23121H-1NPNPNPNPNPNPNPNPNPNPNPNPNPNPNPNPNPNPNPH-2343NP3NP3NP3423NPNPNNP1NP1H-3, H-4232NP2NP2NP2312NPNP1NP1dNP1H-52NP2NP2NP2NP2NP1NPNPNP1NP1NPN</table>

S = Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. NS = Buildings not equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. N = No separation requirement. NP = Not Permitted.

a. See Section 420.

b. The required separation from areas used only for private or pleasure vehicles shall be reduced by 1 hour but not to less than 1 hour.
c. See Sections 406.3.2 and 406.6.4.

d. Separation is not required between occupancies of the same classification.

e. See Section 422.2 for ambulatory care facilities.

f. Occupancy separations that serve to define fire area limits established in Chapter 9 for requiring fire protection systems shall also comply with Section 707.3.10 and Table 707.3.10 in accordance with Section 901.7.

===== Page 0489 =====
TABLE 509.1

INCIDENTAL USES

<table>ROOM OR AREASEPARATIONaFurnace room where any piece of equipment is over 117 kW per hour input1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler systemRooms with any boiler over 103.5 kPa and 7.5 kW1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler systemRefrigerant machinery rooms1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler systemHydrogen fuel gas rooms, not classified as Group H1 hour in Group B, F, H, M, S and U occupancies. 2 hours in Group A, E, I and R occupancies.Incinerator rooms2 hours and provide automatic sprinkler systemPaint shops, not classified as Group H, located in occupancies other than Group F2 hours; or 1 hour and provide automatic sprinkler systemIn Group E occupancies, Laboratories and vocational shops, not classified as Group H,1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler systemIn Group I-2 occupancies, laboratories not classified as Group H1 hour and provide automatic sprinkler systemIn ambulatory care facilities, laboratories not classified as Group H1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler systemLaundry rooms over 9 m²1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler systemIn Group I-2, laundry rooms over 9 m²1 hourIn ambulatory care facilities or Group, I-2 occupancies, Storage rooms over 9 m²1 hourGroup I-3 cells and Group I-2 patient rooms equipped with padded surfaces1 hourIn Group I-2, physical plant maintenance shops1 hourIn ambulatory care facilities or Group, I-2 occupancies, waste and linen collection rooms with containers that have an aggregate volume of 0.28 cubic meter or greater1 hourIn other than ambulatory care facilities and Group I-2 occupancies, Waste and linen collection rooms over 9 m²1 hour or provide automatic sprinkler systemElectrical installations and transformersSee Sections 110.26 through 110.34 and Sections 450.8 through 450.48 of NFPA 70 (or their equivalent in SBC 401) for protection and separation requirements.</table>

a. Where an automatic fire-extinguishing system is provided, it need only be provided in the incidental use room or area.

FIGURE 503.1.2(1)

BUILDINGS ON SAME LOT

===== Page 0490 =====
FIGURE 503.1.2(2)
TWO BUILDINGS ON SAME LOT CREATED BY FIRE WALL

FIGURE 506.3.1(1)
FRONTAGE INCREASE—FIRE WALL

===== Page 0491 =====
FIGURE 506.3.1(2)
ACCESS TO OPEN SPACE

===== Page 0492 =====
FIGURE 506.3.1(3)
ACCESS TO OPEN SPACE

===== Page 0493 =====
FIGURE 506.3.2
FRONTAGE INCREASE—THREE SIDES

FIGURE 507.2
REQUIRED SEPARATION FOR UNLIMITED AREA BUILDINGS

===== Page 0494 =====
FIGURE 507.2.1
REDUCED OPEN SPACE—BUILDING CORNERS

FIGURE 507.8.1.1

USE GROUP H-2 NOT LOCATED AT THE PERIMETER OF AN UNLIMITED AREA BUILDING

===== Page 0495 =====
FIGURE 507.8.2(1)

GROUP H-2 AT THE CORNER OF AN UNLIMITED AREA BUILDING

FIGURE 507.8.2(2)

GROUP H-2 AT THE CORNER OF AN UNLIMITED AREA BUILDING

===== Page 0496 =====
• TOTAL AREA OF FLOOR = 1000m²

• ACCESSORY USE AREAS (AGGREGATE) = 110m²

• MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE AREA OF ACCESSORY USES (AGGREGATE) = 100m²

• ACCESSORY USE AREAS EXCEED THE AREA PERMITTED 110m² > 100m²

• BUILDING MUST BE REEVALUATED AS A MIXED OCCUPANCY OF OFFICES (B) AND FACTORY (F-1).

FIGURE 508.2.3(1)
ACCESSORY USES LIMITED BY FLOOR AREA

FIGURE 508.2.3(2)
ACCESSORY USES LIMITED BY TABULAR AREA

===== Page 0497 =====
FIGURE 508.3
NONSEPARATED USES

===== Page 0498 =====
FIGURE 508.4.4.1(2)
SEPARATED OCCUPANCIES—EXAMPLE 1: LOCATION ON STORIES

* WALL RATED IN ACCORDANCE WITH TABLE 508.3.3.

BUILDING AREA = 6855 m²
S-1 FIRE AREA = 4155 m²
B FIRE AREA = 2700 m²

FIGURE 508.4.4.1(3)
SEPARATED OCCUPANCIES—EXAMPLE 2

===== Page 0499 =====
* WALL RATED IN ACCORDANCE WITH TABLE 508.4(4).

BUILDING AREA = 6855 m²
S-1 FIRE AREA = 4155 m²
B FIRE AREA = 2700 m²

FIGURE 508.4.4.1(4)
SEPARATED OCCUPANCIES—EXAMPLE 3

CONSTRUCTION TYPE AND NUMBER OF STORIES IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 503

FIGURE 510.2
HORIZONTAL BUILDING SEPARATION

===== Page 0500 =====
FIGURE 510.4
EXAMPLE R-1 OVER ENCLOSED PARKING

===== Page 0501 =====


===== Page 0502 =====
FIGURE 510.6
EXAMPLE TYPE IIA, GROUP R-2 HEIGHT INCREASE

===== Page 0503 =====
FIGURE 510.7
OPEN PARKING BELOW OTHER GROUPS

FIGURE 510.8
EXAMPLE OF S-2 PARKING OVER GROUP B AND M OCCUPANCIES

===== Page 0504 =====
FIGURE 510.9
MULTIPLE SEPARATE BUILDINGS

===== Page 0505 =====
This page left intentionally blank

