===== Page 1821 =====
# CHAPTER 26—PLASTICS

## * General Comments

Plastics are a very large group of synthetic materials with structures that are based on the chemistry of carbon. Plastics are also called polymers because they are made of extremely long chains of carbon atoms. Since plastics can be readily molded, extruded, cast into various shapes and forms, or drawn into filaments and fibers, they are increasingly being used in the construction of buildings and structures. While progress in polymer technology makes it increasingly difficult to make general statements about these materials, the following properties are characteristic of many plastics:

• Low strength (in comparison to steel and other metals commonly used in construction);

• Low stiffness (modulus of elasticity) as compared to metals (except for reinforced plastics);

• Tendency to creep (increase in length under tensile stress);

• Low hardness (except for formaldehyde plastics);

• Low density (varies, plastics can be expanded or unexpanded);

• Brittleness at low temperatures, and loss of strength and hardness at moderately elevated temperatures;

• Flammability (although many plastics do not burn);

• Outstanding electrical characteristics, such as electrical resistance.

• Degradation of some plastics, due to environmental agents, such as ultraviolet radiation (although most plastics are highly resistant to chemical attack).

When plastics and foam plastics were first proposed to be included in the code, consideration was given to several factors. The following is the evolution of plastics being introduced into the model codes.

It was recognized that most buildings classified as noncombustible construction contained combustible elements. These elements were not primary structural members, but included materials such as: asphalt and pitch (in roof coverings); wood (in flooring systems, as wall and ceiling interior finish and trim, and as
furfing and lath in walls); paper products (as slip sheets and vapor retarders); and cork (as insulation).

There was a sensitivity to the burning characteristics of all plastic materials based on the history of fires involving plastics in warehouses and building applications not covered by any of the model codes. It was agreed, therefore, that plastic materials should be required to meet minimum fire performance properties and each application would have appropriate requirements related to characteristics, such as rate of burning, surface flammability or smoke-development index. This position is somewhat different from the regulation of traditional materials, such as wood, paper and asphalt, which frequently are not required to be separately fire tested where used within an assembly.

Plastic materials to be left exposed on the interior or exterior of buildings would have to meet the existing requirements for other finish materials, as well as be limited in area and subject to separation requirements between adjoining areas. The primary concern was that plastic materials would be used in applications in which glass had traditionally been used, such as skylights and light-diffusing ceilings. Since limited experience-based data were available at the time, a conservative approach was taken.

Foam plastics used as thermal insulation would be separated from the interior of buildings by a thermal barrier equivalent to 12.5 mm-thick gypsum wallboard. This position was supported by the industry because most of the applications at that time included plaster or wallboard finishes of 12.5 mm or greater thickness, and the fire record for such applications was good.

Specific examples of commonly used acceptable applications would be included in the code, such as the use of foam plastics within wood frame and masonry walls.

Finally, the code would include a statement that “diversified tests” would be necessary for approval of any application or material not meeting the prescriptive requirements of the code. The reason for including diversified tests was because it was clear that it would not be possible or even desirable to include all applications specifically in the code. Diversified tests were intended to mean tests related to the end use, and usually were full-scale

===== Page 1822 =====
assemblies exposed to fire conditions representative of actual fires that might be expected to occur.

## Purpose

This chapter establishes minimum requirements for all light-transmitting and foam plastics in all applications regulated by the code. Some plastics exhibit rapid flame spread and heavy smoke density characteristics where exposed to fire. Additionally, exposure to the heat generated by a fire can cause some plastics to deform and undergo a change in their structural stability. The requirements and limitations of this chapter are necessary to control the use of these combustible products such that they do not compromise the safety of building occupants.

## SECTION 2601 GENERAL.

2601.1 Scope. These provisions shall govern the materials, design, application, construction and installation of foam plastic, foam plastic insulation, plastic veneer, interior plastic finish and trim, light-transmitting plastics and plastic composites, including plastic lumber.

Chapter 26 governs foam plastics, plastic veneers and light-transmitting plastic materials regardless of their use. Requirements for foam plastic insulation are found in Section 2603. Requirements for interior finish and trim are found in Section 2604. Requirements for plastic veneer are found in Section 2605. The main requirements for light-transmitting plastics are found in Section 2606. Sections 2607 through 2612 cover a variety of applications of light-transmitting plastics. Requirements for fiberglass and fiber-reinforced polymer are found in Section 2613. Lastly, requirements for reflective plastic core insulation are found in Section 2614. Essentially, this chapter details how such combustible materials can be used in building construction. This includes wall panels, glazing, roof panels, skylights and interior signs.

## SECTION 2602 FINISH AND TRIM

2602.1 Exterior wall covering and architectural trim. See Chapter 14 for requirements for exterior wall covering and architectural trim.

This section refers the user to information on plastic wall covering and architectural trim.

2602.2 Interior finish and trim. See Section 2604 for requirements for interior finish and trim.

This section refers the user to information on plastic interior trim.

## SECTION 2603 FOAM PLASTIC
INSULATION

2603.1 General. The provisions of this section shall govern the requirements and uses of foam plastic insulation in buildings and structures.

Section 2603 contains all of the life-safety provisions for foam plastic insulation products, such as rigid insulation board, spray-foam insulation and pour-in-place insulation. "Foam plastic" is a general term given to insulating products that have been manufactured by intentionally expanding plastic by the use of a foaming agent. Extruded polystyrene (XPS) expanded polystyrene (EPS), polyisocyanate (PIR or ISO), open-cell polyisocyanate, phenolic, polyurethane and polypropylene foam are among the many types of foam plastic insulation products subject to the requirements found in this section. In addition to technical requirements listed in the following paragraph, all packages and containers of foam plastic insulation must bear a label of an approved agency listing the manufacturer's name, the product listing, product identification and information sufficient to determine that the end use will comply with the code requirements.

Compliance with this section shall be achieved through either the prescriptive method or the performance method. The prescriptive method requires compliance with Sections 2603.4 through 2603.7. The performance method requires compliance with Section 2603.9. Note that both methods require compliance with Section 2603.3, which covers surface burning characteristics and Section 2603.8, which covers protection against termites.

Commentary Figure 2603.1 documents code compliance where foam plastic is used.

2603.1.1 Spray-applied foam plastic. Single- and multiple-component spray-applied foam plastic insulation shall comply with the provisions of Section 2603 and ICC 1100-2018.

This section covers the performance requirements for spray-applied foam plastic insulation. Spray-applied foam plastic must comply with the requirement of foam plastic insulation per Section 2603 and ICC 1100, Standard for Spray-applied Foam Plastic Insulation. ICC 1100 establishes the minimum physical and performance properties as well as application requirements for spray-applied foam plastic insulation.

2603.2 Labeling and identification. Packages and containers of foam plastic insulation and foam plastic insulation components delivered to the job site shall bear the label of an approved agency showing the manufacturer's name, product listing,

===== Page 1823 =====
product identification and information sufficient to determine that the end use will comply with the code requirements.

All foam plastics or packages of foam plastics delivered to the construction site must be labeled. Also, labels are required on containers [usually two components in 208 Liters drums of ingredients delivered for the production of foam plastic at the construction site. The label must include identification of the approved testing agency and detailed product identification or information describing the performance characteristics required of the product. It is intended that labeling printed on board stock or on packaging be acceptable. It is also intended that the label information include the name of the manufacturer or distributor and the type of foam plastic.

2603.3 Surface-burning characteristics. Unless otherwise indicated in this section, foam plastic insulation and foam plastic cores of manufactured assemblies shall have a flame spread index of not more than 75 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 where tested in the maximum thickness intended for use in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Loose fill-type foam plastic insulation shall be tested as board stock for the flame spread and smoke-developed indices.

## Exceptions:

1. Smoke-developed index for interior trim as provided for in Section 2604.2.

2. In cold storage buildings, ice plants, food plants, food processing rooms and similar areas, foam plastic insulation where tested in a thickness of 100 mm shall be permitted in a thickness up to 250 mm where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in both the room and that part of the building in which the room is located.

3. Foam plastic insulation that is a part of a Class A, B or C roof-covering assembly provided that the assembly with the foam plastic insulation satisfactorily passes NFPA 276 or UL 1256. The smoke-developed index shall not be limited for roof applications.

4. Foam plastic insulation greater than 100 mm in thickness shall have a maximum flame spread index of 75 and a smoke-developed index of 450 where tested at a minimum thickness of 100 mm, provided that the end use is approved in accordance with Section 2603.9 using the maximum thickness and density intended for use.

5. Flame spread and smoke-developed indexes for foam plastic interior signs in covered and open mall buildings provided the signs comply with Section 402.6.4.

Foam plastic insulation or foam plastic cores used as a component in a manufactured assembly are combustible and must be assessed for flame spread index and smoke-developed index. Testing in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 is required. The foam plastic must be tested in the maximum thickness to be used [up to 100 mm thickness; see Exception 4 for foam thicker than 100 mm] and limited to a flame spread index of 75 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less. The 100 mm thickness for testing is specifically related to the limitation on testing thickness in ASTM E84 or UL 723. All foam plastic materials are required to be tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723, unless specifically exempted or modified by one of the listed exceptions.

Five exceptions relate to whether the limitations — flame spread index of 75 and smoke-developed index of 450 — apply or if the thickness of material is allowed to exceed 100 mm as limited by ASTM E84 or UL 723:

1 Use as interior trim is not required to meet the smoke-developed index limitation of 450, but must still meet the flame spread index requirement of less than or equal to 75.

2 In fully sprinklered buildings, cold storage construction using foam plastic is allowed to exceed the thickness of 100 mm up to 250 mm even when the material has only been tested at 100 mm with ASTM E84 or UL 263.

3 Where used as part of a Class A, B or C roof covering assembly in which the assembly has successfully passed NFPA 276 or UL 1256 testing, foam plastic insulation is not required to meet the flame spread index rating of 75. Also, smoke-developed index ratings are not required or limited for any foam plastic insulation used in roof assemblies. The intent is to recognize that the overall hazards of roofing have already been addressed and additional testing requirements for flame spread would be unnecessary. The NFPA 276 standard is a consensus standard that is identical to and replaces the previously referenced FM 4450 standard.

4 Foam plastic insulation thicker than 100 mm is allowed if tested in accordance with Section 2603.9. This provision would require the full as-installed thickness of the foam plastic to be tested. The tests referenced in Section 2603.9 are generally full-scale room-

===== Page 1824 =====
corner tests. Such material would also still be required to be tested to ASTM E84 or UL 723 at a 100 mm thickness and result in a flame spread index not greater than 75 and a smoke-developed index of 450.

5 Use as interior signs in covered and open mall buildings is required to comply with Section 402.6.4. Section 402.6.4 requires compliance with UL 1975, which measures the rate of heat release of burning materials used in the manufacture of such signs. Section 402.6.4 sets the pass/fail criteria at a maximum heat release rate of 150 kW. Although this test method assesses heat release rate rather than surface-burning characteristics, the testing and criteria specified provide material characteristics that address the goal of limiting the spread of fire.

The maximum flame spread index value of 75 was chosen on the basis that it is lower than untreated wood (which usually is 100 to 165). The maximum smoke-developed index rating of 450 was selected because, at the time, the code permitted interior finish materials that gave off "smoke no more dense than that given off by untreated wood." In selecting the maximum flame spread and smoke-developed index values, it was believed that a conservative approach was being taken by requiring an insulation material to meet the same requirements as interior finish, even though the insulation was intended to be covered with an interior finish material. The requirements for surface-burning characteristics of foam plastic apply to foam plastics used as cores of manufactured assemblies. The intent is that, while the finished assemblies are not required to be tested for surface-burning characteristics, the foam plastic core is not exempt from the general requirement; therefore, foam plastic is regulated in factory-manufactured assemblies the same as it is in field-fabricated applications.

2603.4 Thermal barrier. Except as provided for in Sections 2603.4.1 and 2603.9, foam plastic shall be separated from the interior of a building by an approved thermal barrier of 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard, heavy timber in accordance with Section 602.4, or a material that is tested in accordance with and meets the acceptance criteria of both the Temperature Transmission Fire Test and the Integrity Fire Test of NFPA 275. Combustible concealed spaces shall comply with Section 718.

The use of an approved thermal barrier to separate foam plastics from the interior of a building is a basic requirement for the use of foam plastics as shown in this section. Sections 2603.4.1 and 2603.9 describe circumstances where the thermal barrier is modified or eliminated for specific uses. The job of a thermal barrier is to limit the temperature rise that the foam plastic will be exposed to. An approved thermal barrier is defined as 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard or the equivalent. This section sets forth the test method by which alternative thermal barriers are to be qualified. Before 1975, experience had shown that foam plastics covered with plaster or 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard had performed satisfactorily in building fires. For this reason, 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard was included in the code as a minimum requirement. It was then recognized that specifying a single material would not be desirable in a performance code; therefore, testing in accordance with NFPA 275 is allowed to qualify other materials. This test method was developed to specifically address the testing of materials to qualify as a thermal barrier. The test method provides specific sample construction, fire exposures and acceptance criteria to qualify a material to be a 15-minute thermal barrier. The test method addresses both the capability of the material to retard heat transfer via a fire-resistance test and to remain in place via a full-scale fire test. Gypsum wallboard is still the most commonly used thermal barrier, but other materials are permitted when qualified using NFPA 275.

2603.4.1 Thermal barrier not required. The thermal barrier specified in Section 2603.4 is not required under the conditions set forth in Sections 2603.4.1.1 through 2603.4.1.14.

A thermal barrier is not required for applications described in Sections 2603.4.1.1 through 2603.4.1.14. The prescriptive installation methods described in these sections must be strictly followed in order to serve as an alternative to the thermal barrier.

Furthermore, installations of foam plastics in accordance with these sections do not have to be tested via the alternative approval testing requirements of Section 2603.9.

2603.4.1.1 Masonry or concrete construction. A thermal barrier is not required for foam plastic installed in a masonry or concrete wall, floor or roof system where the foam plastic insulation is covered on each face by not less than 25 mm thickness of masonry or concrete.

No thermal barrier is required where 25 mm or more of masonry or concrete is placed between the foam plastic and interior of the building. The intent is to accept 25 mm of masonry or concrete as equal to (or better than) 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard. This condition can arise where foam plastics are installed either within a wall or on the exterior side of a masonry wall. Some common examples of where foam plastics are installed:

===== Page 1825 =====
• In the cavity of a hollow masonry wall.

• As the core of a concrete-faced panel.

• On the exterior face of a masonry wall and covered with an exterior finish.

• Within the cores of hollow masonry units; or

• Encapsulated within a minimum of 25 mm concrete or masonry wall, floor or roof system, such as in insulated tilt-up or pour-in-place concrete panels.

Note that the exterior surface would be required to comply with Section 2603.5.

2603.4.1.2 Cooler and freezer walls. Foam plastic installed in a maximum thickness of 250 mm in cooler and freezer walls shall:

1 Have a flame spread index of 25 or less and a smoke developed index of not more than 450, where tested in a minimum 100 mm thickness.

2 Have flash ignition and self-ignition temperatures of not less than  \( 316^{\circ} \) C and  \( 427^{\circ} \) C, respectively.

3 Have a covering of not less than 0.8 mm aluminum or corrosion-resistant steel having a base metal thickness not less than 0.4 mm at any point.

4 Be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. Where the cooler or freezer is within a building, both the cooler or freezer and that part of the building in which it is located shall be sprinkled.

A thermal barrier is not required in cooler and freezer walls insulated with 250 mm or less of foam plastic where all four criteria in Section 2603.4.1.2 are met.

2603.4.1.3 Walk-in coolers. In nonsprinklered buildings, foam plastic having a thickness that does not exceed 100 mm and a maximum flame spread index of 75 is permitted in walk-in coolers or freezer units where the aggregate floor area does not exceed  \( 37 \, m^2 \)  and the foam plastic is covered by a metal facing not less than 0.8 mm-thick aluminum or corrosion-resistant steel having a minimum base metal thickness of 0.4 mm. A thickness of up to 250 mm is permitted where protected by a thermal barrier.

A thermal barrier is not required for foam plastics up to 100 mm thick when the minimum thickness metal facings are used in coolers or freezers no greater than  \( 37 \, m^2 \)  in floor area. The required metal facing is intended to act as a barrier against ignition of the foam plastic. It is not intended to serve as a thermal barrier. This section recognizes the relatively small size of walk-in coolers and the accompanying lower hazard. Foam plastic up to 250 mm is permitted where protected by a thermal barrier. Exterior walls—one-story buildings. For one story buildings, foam plastic having a flame spread index of 25 or less, and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450, shall be permitted without thermal barriers in or on exterior walls in a thickness not more than 100 mm where the foam plastic is covered by a thickness of not less than 0.8 mm thick aluminum or corrosion resistant steel having a base metal thickness of 0.4 mm and the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

Foam plastics may be used without a thermal barrier in one-story buildings provided that:

• The material is not more than 100 mm thick.

- It has a flame spread index not greater than 25.

- It has a smoke-developed index of not more than 450.

• It is covered with specified metal facings.

The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system.

This provision is intended to permit the use of metal-faced panels, primarily in storage buildings other than cold storage construction. Cold storage construction was also covered in this section (see also Sections 2603.4.1.2 and 2603.4.1.3, and Section 2603.3, Exception 2). The limitations are based on the results of large-scale tests performed by independent laboratories and sponsored by the plastics industry.

2603.4.1.5 Roofing. A thermal barrier is not required for foam plastic insulation that is a part of a Class A, B or C roof covering assembly that is installed in accordance with the code and the manufacturer's instructions and is either constructed as described in Item 1 or tested as described in Item 2.

1 The roof assembly is separated from the interior of the building by wood structural panel sheathing not less than 12.5 mm in thickness bonded with exterior glue, with edges supported by blocking, tongue-and-groove joints, other approved type of edge support or an equivalent material.

2 The assembly with the foam plastic insulation satisfactorily passes NFPA 276 or UL 1256.

No thermal barrier is required when foam plastic is used in a Class A, B or C roof assembly over wood structural panel sheathing, if the wood product is:

===== Page 1826 =====
• At least 12.5 mm thick.

• Manufactured utilizing exterior-grade glue.

• Properly installed to provide adequate edge support.

• Equivalent materials to the wood structural panel sheathing described above are specifically allowed by this section. In any situation, the material must be compatible with the type of construction.

Also, no thermal barrier is required when foam plastic is used with a Class A, B or C roof assembly (as prescribed in Section 1505) when the assembly complies with NFPA 276 or UL 1256. The NFPA 276 standard is a consensus standard that is identical to and replaces the previously referenced FM 4450 standard. Roof assemblies tested to the criteria of the referenced standards have adequately demonstrated a resistance to fire from the underside of the roof deck; therefore, no additional testing is necessary, nor is an additional thermal barrier needed. It is important to note that this section applies to a specific roof assembly (i.e., specific roof deck, specific foam insulation, fasteners and specific roof membrane). Passing the prescribed tests with one specific roof assembly does not cover all combinations of roof systems where foam plastic insulation is used. Users must confirm that the specific roof assembly has achieved a Class A, B or C rating. This coordinates with Section 2603.3, Exception 4, for surface-burning characteristics.

2603.4.1.6 Attics and crawl spaces. Within an attic or crawl space where entry is made only for service of utilities, foam plastic insulation shall be protected against ignition by 40 mm mineral fiber insulation; 6 mm thick wood structural panel, particleboard or hardboard; 10 mm gypsum wallboard, corrosion-resistant steel having a base metal thickness of 0.4 mm; 40 mm thick self-supported spray-applied cellulose insulation in attic spaces only or other approved material installed in such a manner that the foam plastic insulation is not exposed. The protective covering shall be consistent with the requirements for the type of construction.

In an attic or crawl space where entry is made only for service of utilities, and when foam plastics are used, an ignition barrier may be used in place of a thermal barrier to cover the foam plastic. Multiple materials are listed, any of which can be used as the ignition barrier:

• 40 mm mineral fiber insulation.

• 6 mm-thick wood structural panels.

• 10 mm particleboard.

• 6 mm hardboard.

• 10 mm gypsum board.

• Corrosion-resistant steel having a base metal thickness of 0.4 mm.

• 40 mm self-supported spray applied cellulose insulation in attic spaces only.

Note that the ignition barrier must be consistent with the type of construction, which means that combustible coverings are permitted only where combustible materials are otherwise allowed.

The foam plastic material covered with the ignition barrier can be on the floor, wall or the ceiling of the attic or crawl space. The phrase "where entry is made only for service of utilities" applies to attics or crawl spaces that only contain mechanical equipment, electrical wiring, fans, plumbing, gas or electric hot water heaters, gas or electric furnaces, etc. Such provisions would not be allowed for such spaces used for storage or general occupancy. The reduced provision (from a thermal barrier to an ignition barrier) provides a protective cover that was the sole purpose to prevent the direct impingement of flame on the foam plastic insulation (see Commentary Figure 2603.4.1.6). Note that Section 2603.4 would still require a thermal barrier between the interior space above (crawl space) or below (attic) in a structure and the foam plastic. If the foam plastic insulation has passed large-scale testing in the thickness and density intended for use, in accordance with Section 2603.9, no thermal barrier or ignition barrier is required over the foam plastic insulation in an attic or crawl space and this section of the code does not apply. However, it is important to note that the actual configuration must be tested. For example, foam insulation applied to the ceiling of the attic or crawl space must be tested. During the test, the foam must be applied to the ceiling in a room corner test or in an assembly that reflects end use. The same restrictions would apply to those insulations applied to the walls, floors or a combination of surfaces.

2603.4.1.7 Doors not required to have a fire protection rating. Where pivoted or side-hinged doors are permitted without a fire protection rating, foam plastic insulation, having a flame spread index of 75 or less and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450, shall be permitted as a core material where the door facing is of metal having a minimum thickness of 0.8 mm aluminum or steel having a base metal thickness of not less than 0.4 mm at any point.

A thermal barrier is not required when foam plastic is used as a core material for doors.

===== Page 1827 =====
provided that a specified metal facing is used and the door is not required to have a fire-resistance rating. The intent is that doors required to have a fire protection rating must be tested with the foam plastic cores in place in order to qualify. This section recognizes the limited area of doors compared to the walls in which they are located and regulates foam plastics similar to other materials used in doors.

2603.4.1.8 Exterior doors in buildings of Group R-2 or R-3. In occupancies classified as Group R-2 or R-3, foam-filled exterior entrance doors to individual dwelling units that do not require a fire-resistance rating shall be faced with aluminum, steel, fiberglass, wood or other approved materials.

Aluminum, steel, fiberglass, wood or other approved facings on foam-filled exterior entrance doors of Group R-2 and R-3 buildings are permitted when the doors are not required to have a fire-resistance rating. Such doors do not need to comply with Section 2603.4.1.7.

2603.4.1.9 Garage doors. Where garage doors are permitted without a fire-resistance rating and foam plastic is used as a core material, the door facing shall be metal having a minimum thickness of 0.8 mm aluminum or 0.25 mm steel or the facing shall be minimum 3.1 mm-thick wood. Garage doors having facings other than those described in this section shall be tested in accordance with, and meet the acceptance criteria of, DASMA 107.

Exception: Garage doors using foam plastic insulation complying with Section 2603.3 in detached and attached garages associated with one- and two-family dwellings need not be provided with a thermal barrier.

The prescriptive requirements of this section regulate garage doors with foam plastic cores used in non-fire-resistance-rated applications. The requirements in Section 2603.4.1.9, which governs overhead sectional, coiling or vertical lift-type garage doors, are slightly different from the requirements of Sections 2603.4.1.7 and 2603.4.1.8, which govern means of egress doors, such as side-swinging doors. These garage doors are not limited to such doors used in conjunction with a private or public garage occupancy but refer to doors for vehicles in any occupancies.

The minimum door-facing material and thickness requirements for garage doors with foam plastic cores stated in this section were determined based on the results of a fire testing program sponsored by the National Association of Garage Door Manufacturers (NAGDM). This program exposed a variety of commercially manufactured garage doors to a room corner fire test. The results of the testing indicated that garage doors having facings in the minimum thicknesses stated did not spread fire to the edge of the specimen and did not cause flashover in the test room. Other garage door constructions using foam plastics that do not meet minimum code requirements can be brought into compliance by meeting the requirements of testing the complete garage door assembly to ANSI/DASMA 107. Room Fire Test Standard for Garage Doors Using Foam Plastic Insulation. This standard includes a description of the test method, performance data to be obtained and the acceptance criteria to use in evaluating the performance data.

This section exempts exterior garage doors used in garages attached to one- and two-family dwellings and detached garages (Group R-3) from the thermal barrier requirements of Section 2603.4. This exemption is similar to that of Section 2603.4.1.8 for exterior egress doors in Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies.

As noted within the section, such doors are not intended for installation in fire-rated exterior walls. There are other products, such as rolling steel fire doors, manufactured for this purpose.

2603.4.1.10 Siding backer board. Foam plastic insulation of not more than 22 mJ/m \( ^{2} \)  as determined by NFPA 259 shall be permitted as a siding backer board with a maximum thickness of 12.5 mm, provided it is separated from the interior of the building by not less than 50 mm of mineral fiber insulation or equivalent or where applied as insulation with residing over existing wall construction.

Foam plastic is frequently used in residing applications to provide a leveling surface for new siding, while also bringing additional insulation value to the wall assembly. Also available in the marketplace are products that combine exterior siding material and foam plastic. If these siding/redising products are used on the exterior of a wall and the requirements of Sections 2603.3 and 2603.4 are met, this section of the code does not apply. If a thermal barrier is not used on the interior of the building, then there are limitations placed on the products and their use. In addition to the flame spread index limitations of Section 2603.3, other property limitations of the foam plastic or foam plastic portion of the product include a maximum thickness of 12.5 mm and potential heat of less than 22 mJ/m \( ^{2} \)  when tested using NFPA 259. Limitations in foam and siding/foam combination product use include separation from the interior of the building by 50 mm of mineral fiber insulation, installation over an existing wall finish as part of residing or where

===== Page 1828 =====
the foam plastic insulation is tested in accordance with Section 2603.9. The removal of the thermal barrier requirement in this section is reasonable considering the separation provided by the existing construction and limitation of the potential heat of the foam plastic imposed by the code. Also, the code requires fire-resistance ratings from the exterior side of walls only when the fire separation distance is 3000 mm or less (see Section 705.5).

2603.4.1.11 Interior trim. Foam plastic used as interior trim in accordance with Section 2604 shall be permitted without a thermal barrier.

This section specifies that a thermal barrier is not needed for interior trim that meets the limitations of Section 2604 and related subsections, which place limitations on foam plastic density, thickness, wall and ceiling area coverage and flame spread.

2603.4.1.12 Interior signs. Foam plastic used for interior signs in covered mall buildings in accordance with Section 402.6.4 shall be permitted without a thermal barrier. Foam plastic signs that are not affixed to interior building surfaces shall comply with Chapter 8 of SBC 801.

A thermal barrier is not required for interior signs that meet the limits stated in Section 402.6.4, since the hazard from the interior signs is appropriately addressed by test standard UL1975 (see commentary, Section 402.6.4.5). If the foam plastic sign is not affixed to an interior surface of the building, then the requirements of Chapter 8 of SBC 801 must be met. More specifically, Section 808.3 of SBC 801 requires compliance with UL 1975 when such signs exceed 10 percent of the wall or ceiling area, whichever is less.

2603.4.1.13 Type V construction. Foam plastic spray applied to a sill plate, joist header and rim joist in Type V construction is subject to all of the following:

1 The maximum thickness of the foam plastic shall be 82 mm.

2 The density of the foam plastic shall be in the range of 24 to 32 kg per m \( ^{3} \) .

3 The foam plastic shall have a flame spread index of 25 or less and an accompanying smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

A thermal barrier is not required when foam plastic is spray applied to the sill plate, joist header and rim joist in Type V construction when all of the conditions listed in Section 2603.4.1.13 are met. Because foam plastic insulation in this application is left exposed, the four conditions listed limit the hazards of the spray-applied foam plastic used in this application:

• Thickness less than or equal to 82 mm.

• Density is between 24 to 32 kg per m \( ^{3} \) .

- Flame spread index is less than or equal to 25.

- Smoke-developed index is less than or equal to 450.

This particular allowance was based on a room corner fire test that compared the performance of an all-wood floor system to that of a wood floor system with foam plastic sprayed on sill plates and headers (see Commentary Figure 2603.4.1.13).

2603.4.1.14 Floors. The thermal barrier specified in Section 2603.4 is not required to be installed on the walking surface of a structural floor system that contains foam plastic insulation where the foam plastic is covered by a minimum nominal 12.5 mm-thick wood structural panel or approved equivalent. The thermal barrier specified in Section 2603.4 is required on the underside of the structural floor system that contains foam plastic insulation where the underside of the structural floor system is exposed to the interior of the building.

Exception: Foam plastic used as part of an interior floor finish.

In construction, many types of products that incorporate foam plastic insulation are being used for energy reasons. One example is structural insulated panels (SIPs) where the foam plastic is laminated between two structural wood facings. This type of panel can be used as a wall, floor or roof.

Foam plastic is required to be protected by a thermal barrier that typically is 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard. In the case of flooring, gypsum wallboard or other common thermal barrier materials cannot be used on the walking surfaces due to their friability to load, etc.

This section allows for the 12.5 mm-thick plywood or equivalent to provide thermal protection to the foam plastic insulation. While 12.5 mm plywood is not by itself a thermal barrier, in the case of a floor, the plywood provides sufficient protection since in the event of an interior fire, the floor is typically the last building element to be significantly exposed by the fire.

If the floor is used in multistory construction, then the underside of the floor system (ceiling of the room below) must be covered by the required thermal barrier.

The exception addresses items such as carpet padding, etc., that have not and do not need to be covered by a thermal barrier.

===== Page 1829 =====
2603.5 Exterior walls of buildings of any height. Exterior walls of buildings of Type I, II, III or IV construction of any height shall comply with Sections 2603.5.1 through 2603.5.7. Exterior walls of cold storage buildings required to be constructed of noncombustible materials, where the building is more than one story in height, shall comply with the provisions of Sections 2603.5.1 through 2603.5.7. Exterior walls of buildings of Type V construction shall comply with Sections 2603.2, 2603.3 and 2603.4. Fireblocking shall be in accordance with Section 718.2.

All foam plastics used on exterior walls of all types of buildings, except wood frame, are to be installed in accordance with Sections 2603.5.1 through 2603.5.7. Installations on one-story, noncombustible walls of cold storage buildings are required to also comply with the provisions of Sections 2603.5.1 through 2603.5.7. Foam plastics used on exterior walls of Type V buildings are required to comply with Sections 2603.3, 2603.3 and 2603.4. The intent is to regulate the use of an insulating envelope over the exterior of a structure when the envelope provides no structural support other than the transfer of wind loads. It is recognized that some envelopes will be constructed in place by installing a rigid foam plastic and covering it with an exterior finish while others will be installed as prefabricated panels complete with exterior finish.

2603.5.1 Fire-resistance-rated walls. Where the wall is required to have a fire-resistance rating, data based on tests conducted in accordance with ASTM E119 or UL 263 shall be provided to substantiate that the fire-resistance rating is maintained.

Foam plastics are permitted in walls that are required to have fire-resistance ratings. Such assemblies must be fire tested with the foam plastic (at the intended maximum thickness and density) in place.

2603.5.2 Thermal barrier. Any foam plastic insulation shall be separated from the building interior by a thermal barrier meeting the provisions of Section 2603.4, unless special approval is obtained on the basis of Section 2603.9.

Exception: One-story buildings complying with Section 2603.4.1.4.

A thermal barrier is required unless an alternative approval is obtained in accordance with Section 2603.9. The intent is to make it clear that the thermal barrier requirement of Section 2603.4 is applicable. The focus of this section is on external exposure. The exception provides for the reduced requirements of Section 2603.4.1.4 for one-story buildings.
2603.5.3 Potential heat. The potential heat of foam plastic insulation in any portion of the wall or panel shall not exceed the potential heat expressed in  \( mJ/m^{2} \)  of the foam plastic insulation contained in the wall assembly tested in accordance with Section 2603.5.5. The potential heat of the foam plastic insulation shall be determined by tests conducted in accordance with NFPA 259 and the results shall be expressed in  \( mJ/m^{2} \) .

Exception: One-story buildings complying with Section 2603.4.1.4.

This section limits the combustible content of exterior walls based on the potential heat of the foam plastic insulation. Potential heat is essentially the amount of energy potential a particular material contains in terms of its ability to burn. Generally, the higher the potential heat, the higher the fire hazard. The potential heat must not exceed that as found in the tested wall assembly as required in Section 2603.5.5. It is important to note that NFPA 259 addresses potential heat, not fire resistance as addressed by Chapter 7.

2603.5.4 Flame spread and smoke-developed indexes. Foam plastic insulation, exterior coatings and facings shall be tested separately in the thickness intended for use, but not to exceed 100 mm, and shall each have a flame spread index of 25 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less as determined in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

Exception: Prefabricated or factory-manufactured panels having minimum 0.5 mm aluminum facings and a total thickness of 6.3 mm or less are permitted to be tested as an assembly where the foam plastic core is not exposed in the course of construction.

Each component, including the foam plastic core, must be tested and have a maximum flame spread index of 25 and a maximum smoke-developed index of 450 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. The material should be tested with the same thickness intended for use, but is not to exceed a 100 mm thickness for testing. Full-scale testing can address the actual thickness and is required by Section 2603.5.5. Materials should not be restricted by the testing limitations of the referenced standards where they perform well at a higher thickness in the full-scale test. The exception applies to prefabricated panels that can be installed without exposing the foam plastic.

2603.5.5 Vertical and lateral fire propagation. The exterior wall assembly shall be

===== Page 1830 =====
tested in accordance with and comply with the acceptance criteria of NFPA 285.

Exceptions:

1. One-story buildings complying with Section 2603.4.1.4.

2. Wall assemblies where the foam plastic insulation is covered on each face by not less than 25 mm thickness of masonry or concrete and meeting one of the following:

2.1. There is no airspace between the insulation and the concrete or masonry.

2.2. The insulation has a flame spread index of not more than 25 as determined in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 and the maximum airspace between the insulation and the concrete or masonry is not more than 25 mm.

This section is the only provision dealing with the propagation of fire due to exposure from an exterior source. Other combustibles are not allowed as components of noncombustible building exterior walls. The focus is flammability versus fire resistance.

There are two exceptions to the testing requirements of this section. Exception 1 exempts one-story buildings with approved coverings over the foam plastic as described in Section 2603.4.1.4. Exception 2 exempts wall assemblies where the foam plastic is protected on each face with a minimum thickness of masonry or concrete. The wall assembly is further limited such that there can be no air space between the foam plastic and the masonry or concrete. Limiting this air space reduces the area of the foam plastic that is exposed to a fire condition. Lastly, there is an option for a maximum 25 mm air space between the foam plastic and the masonry or concrete if the insulation has a very low flame spread index (25 or less).

2603.5.6 Label required. The edge or face of each piece, package or container of foam plastic insulation shall bear the label of an approved agency. The label shall contain the manufacturer's or distributor's identification, model number, serial number or definitive information describing the product or materials' performance characteristics and approved agency's identification.

Each piece, package or container of foam plastic is required to be labeled. This requirement is somewhat different than the general marking requirement of Section 2603.2, which only requires a manufacturer's identifying mark on either the product or the packaging. The reason for this is that properties other than fire performance of the foam plastic, such as bond strength to the exterior finish, are of significance in this type of application. Different types of foam plastic insulations are being used in building construction. These foam plastics include manufactured foam boards and spray polyurethane foam. Spray foam products are delivered to the job site in drums, which contain the components of the foam plastic insulation. Typically, materials from two drums are mixed as they are sprayed and the resultant foam plastic insulation is applied to the wall surfaces. The component (drums or packaging) bears a label with the information required in the section.

2603.5.7 Ignition. Exterior walls shall not exhibit sustained flaming where tested in accordance with NFPA 268. Where a material is intended to be installed in more than one thickness, tests of the minimum and maximum thickness intended for use shall be performed.

Exception: Assemblies protected on the outside with one of the following:

1. A thermal barrier complying with Section 2603.4.

2. A minimum 25 mm thickness of concrete or masonry.

3. Glass-fiber-reinforced concrete panels of a minimum thickness of 10 mm.

4. Metal-faced panels having minimum 0.5 mm aluminum or 0.4 mm corrosion-resistant steel outer facings.

5. A minimum 20 mm thickness of stucco complying with Section 2510.

6. A minimum 6 mm thickness of fiber-cement lap, panel or shingle siding complying with Sections 1404.16 and 1404.16.1 or 1404.16.2.

The foam plastic is not to support continued flaming when tested in accordance with NFPA 268, which looks at ignitability where exposed to a radiant heat source. Where the foam plastic is to be used in more than one thickness, the test is to be performed on minimum and maximum thickness. If the assembly is protected on the outside with one of the specified materials, the test is not required.

2603.6 Roofing. Foam plastic insulation meeting the requirements of Sections 2603.2, 2603.3 and 2603.4 shall be permitted as part of a roof-covering assembly, provided the assembly with the foam plastic insulation is a Class A, B or C roofing assembly where tested in accordance with ASTM E108 or UL 790.

* Foam plastic insulation that meets the labeling and identification, surface-burning characteristics and thermal barrier criteria are permitted as part of a Class A, B or C roof-

===== Page 1831 =====
covering assembly that has been tested in accordance with ASTM E108 or UL 790. Both ASTM E108 and UL 790 cover exterior spread of flame.

2603.7 Foam plastic in plenums as interior finish or interior trim. Foam plastic in plenums used as interior wall or ceiling finish, or interior trim, shall exhibit a flame spread index of 25 or less and a smoke-developed index of 50 or less when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 at the maximum thickness and density intended for use, and shall be tested in accordance with NFPA 286 and meet the acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.1. As an alternative to testing to NFPA 286, the foam plastic shall be approved based on tests conducted in accordance with Section 2603.9.

## Exceptions:

1. Foam plastic in plenums used as interior wall or ceiling finish, or interior trim, shall exhibit a flame spread index of 75 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 at the maximum thickness and density intended for use, where it is separated from the airflow in the plenum by a thermal barrier complying with Section 2603.4.

2. Foam plastic in plenums used as interior wall or ceiling finish, or interior trim, shall exhibit a flame spread index of 75 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 at the maximum thickness and density intended for use, where it is separated from the airflow in the plenum by corrosion-resistant steel having a base metal thickness of not less than 0.4 mm.

3. Foam plastic in plenums used as interior wall or ceiling finish, or interior trim, shall exhibit a flame spread index of 75 or less and a smoke-developed index of 450 or less when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 at the maximum thickness and density intended for use, where it is separated from the airflow in the plenum by not less than a 25 mm thickness of masonry or concrete.

Foam plastic insulation and foam plastic trim are combustible. If used in a plenum space, the flame and smoke of combusting foam plastic could easily spread to other parts of the building through the HVAC system. If these materials are used as a component of the interior walls or ceiling of a plenum space, the materials must be specially manufactured to provide for limited flame spread and smoke-developed indices. At a minimum, any exposed foam plastic insulation and trim must exhibit smoke and flame characteristics less than or equal to those specified in this section (25 flame spread/50 smoke developed). It must meet the criteria for interior finish given in Section 803.1.1 where conducting large-scale testing with the proposed end-use configuration in accordance with NFPA 286, or alternatively, one of the large-scale tests in Section 2603.9.

Exceptions 1, 2 and 3 each offer an alternative that requires the foam plastic material to be separated from the interior of the plenum. In those cases, the flame spread and smoke-developed ratings are relaxed to 75 and 450, respectively, and large-scale testing is not required. The limitations on foam plastic are consistent with the requirements of Section 602.2.1.6 of SBC 501.

2603.8 Protection against termites. In areas where the probability of termite infestation is very heavy, extruded and expanded polystyrene, polyisocyanurate and other foam plastics shall not be installed on the exterior face or under interior or exterior foundation walls or slab foundations located below grade. The clearance between foam plastics installed above grade and exposed earth shall be not less than 150 mm.

## Exceptions:

1. Buildings where the structural members of walls, floors, ceilings and roofs are entirely of non-combustible materials or preservative-treated wood.

2. An approved method of protecting the foam plastic and structure from subterranean termite damage is provided.

3. On the interior side of basement walls.

This section of the code addresses the use of foam plastics in areas of “very heavy” termite infestation. Termites have been reported to cause damage to foam insulation in very heavy termite infestation areas. Foam plastic used in the “very heavy” infestation area is prohibited on the exterior face of below-grade foundation walls or slab foundations; under exterior or interior foundation walls; or under slab foundations below grade or where located within 150 mm of exposed earth, unless the requirement of one of the three specific exceptions is met. Foam plastics are permitted on the interior side of basement walls, where the structural members of the building are either noncombustible or pressure-preservative-treated wood or where the foam plastic is adequately protected from subterranean termite damage.

===== Page 1832 =====
2603.9 Special approval. Foam plastic shall not be required to comply with the requirements of Section 2603.4 or those of Section 2603.6 where specifically approved based on large-scale tests such as, but not limited to, NFPA 286 (with the acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.1.1), FM 4880, UL 1040 or UL 1715. Such testing shall be related to the actual end-use configuration and be performed on the finished manufactured foam plastic assembly in the maximum thickness intended for use. Foam plastics that are used as interior finish on the basis of special tests shall also conform to the flame spread and smoke-developed requirements of Chapter 8. Assemblies tested shall include seams, joints and other typical details used in the installation of the assembly and shall be tested in the manner intended for use.

Foam plastic does not have to comply with the installation and use requirements of Sections 2603.4 and 2603.6 where specific approval is obtained in accordance with this section. This section lists examples of specific large-scale tests, such as FM 4880, NFPA 286, UL 1040 or UL 1715. Also, other large-scale fire tests related to actual end-use configurations can be used. The intent is to require testing based on the proposed end-use configuration of the foam plastic assembly with a fire exposure that is appropriate in size and location for the proposed application. These tests are to be performed on full-scale assemblies. The tested assemblies must include typical seams, joints and other details that will occur in the finished installation. The foam plastic must be tested in the maximum thickness and density intended for use.

Thorough testing provides an accurate depiction of the in-place fire performance of assemblies and systems using foam plastics. There are two ways to show code compliance under Section 2603.9. One method is to provide the actual test report that contains a description of the assembly and results showing that the foam plastic, in the end-use application, has passed the test. The second method is to obtain from an evaluation agency such as ICC-ES, an evaluation report that covers the end-use application. Materials that are being used as interior finish would still need to additionally pass the flame spread index and smoke-developed index requirements of Chapter 8. It should be noted that NFPA 286 is one way of demonstrating compliance with the interior finish requirements of Chapter 8 and with this section. Note that the other requirements within Section 2603 other than Sections 2603.4 and 2603.6 are still applicable, such as the testing required in accordance with Section 2603.5 for exterior walls.
2603.10 Wind resistance. Foam plastic insulation complying with ASTM C578 and ASTM C1289 and used as exterior wall sheathing on framed wall assemblies shall comply with ANSI/FS 100 for wind pressure resistance.

The ANSI standard (FS 100-12) referenced in this section addresses the use of foam plastic insulating sheathing in exterior wall covering assemblies where resistance to wind pressure is required. This standard provides a methodology by which a manufacturer can qualify their product, through testing, to meet the requirements of the Saudi-codes in establishing the wind pressure resistance of the product. It also provides for ongoing quality control procedures to ensure that the product continues to meet its qualified wind pressure resistance. The ANSI standard supplements the applicable ASTM materials standards also referenced in this section.

2603.11 Cladding attachment over foam sheathing to masonry or concrete wall construction. Cladding shall be specified and installed in accordance with Chapter 14 and the cladding manufacturer's installation instructions or an approved design. Foam sheathing shall be attached to masonry or concrete construction in accordance with the insulation manufacturer's installation instructions or an approved design. Furring and furring attachments through foam sheathing shall be designed to resist design loads determined in accordance with Chapter 16, including support of cladding weight as applicable. Fasteners used to attach cladding or furring through foam sheathing to masonry or concrete substrates shall be approved for application into masonry or concrete material and shall be installed in accordance with the fastener manufacturer's installation instructions.

## Exceptions:

1. Where the cladding manufacturer has provided approved installation instructions for application over foam sheathing and connection to a masonry or concrete substrate, those requirements shall apply.

2. For exterior insulation and finish systems, refer to Section 1407.

3. For anchored masonry or stone veneer installed over foam sheathing, refer to Section 1404.

This section addresses attachment of cladding through foam sheathing to masonry and concrete wall construction. Guidance for attachment of cladding to masonry/concrete walls through foam sheathing is needed as it is

===== Page 1833 =====
becoming a standard practice to install foam sheathing on the exterior side of the building's exterior envelope. Research is not yet available to justify prescriptive "off-the-shelf" solutions with standardized types of concrete/masonry fasteners. Also, many fasteners best suited for this application are proprietary and approved data and design is the best approach. Therefore, this section requires engineered design of cladding connections through foam sheathing to masonry/concrete. The exceptions recognize cases where appropriate attachment solutions may already exist.

2603.12 Cladding attachment over foam sheathing to cold-formed steel framing. Cladding shall be specified and installed in accordance with Chapter 14 and the cladding manufacturer's approved installation instructions, including any limitations for use over foam plastic sheathing, or an approved design. Where used, furring and furring attachments shall be designed to resist design loads determined in accordance with Chapter 16. In addition, the cladding or furring attachments through foam sheathing to cold-formed steel framing shall meet or exceed the minimum fastening requirements of Sections 2603.12.1 and 2603.12.2, or an approved design for support of cladding weight.

## Exceptions:

1. Where the cladding manufacturer has provided approved installation instructions for application over foam sheathing, those requirements shall apply.

2. For exterior insulation and finish systems, refer to Section 1407.

3. For anchored masonry or stone veneer installed over foam sheathing, refer to Section 1404.

This section addresses attachment of cladding through foam sheathing to wall construction of cold formed steel framing. The requirements are based on a project sponsored by the New York State Energy Research and Development authority (NYSERDA) and the Steel Framing Alliance. The purpose of the NYSERDA project was to develop prescriptive fastening requirements for cladding materials installed over foam sheathing to ensure adequate performance. The project included testing of cladding attachments through various thicknesses of foam sheathing using various fastener types on steel frame wall assemblies. Supplemental testing also was sponsored by the Foam Sheathing Coalition (lab report available at www.foamsheathing.org) to address attachments to wood framing. The resulting data are included in the data set analysed and presented in the NYSERDA project report. The proposed cladding attachment requirements and foam sheathing thickness limits are based on rational analysis verified by the extensive test data to control cladding connection movement to not more than 0.4 mm slip under cladding weight or dead load. This deflection-controlled approach resulted in safety factors commonly in the range of 5 to 8 relative to average shear capacity.

2603.12.1 Direct attachment. Where cladding is installed directly over foam sheathing without the use of furring, cladding minimum fastening requirements to support the cladding weight shall be as specified in Table 2603.12.1.

This section prescribes fastening requirements for cladding installed without furring directly over a foam sheathing. See the commentary to Section 2603.12 for a discussion of the derivation of these fasteners and values. Cladding minimum fastening requirements for direct attachment over foam plastic sheathing to support cladding weight is specified in Table 2603.12.1. This value is based on cladding fastener type and minimum size, cladding fastener vertical spacing, and other factors.

2603.12.2 Furred cladding attachment. Where steel or wood furring is used to attach cladding over foam sheathing, furring minimum fastening requirements to support the cladding weight shall be as specified in Table 2603.12.2. Where placed horizontally, wood furring shall be preservative treated wood in accordance with Section 2303.1.9 or naturally durable wood and fasteners shall be corrosion resistant in accordance with Section 2304.10.6. Steel furring shall have a minimum G60 galvanized coating.

This section prescribes fastening requirements for cladding installed over steel or wood furring that is installed over foam sheathing. See commentary to Section 2603.12 for a discussion of the derivation of these fasteners and values. This section also prescribes minimum specifications for wood and steel framing.

Furring minimum fastening requirements for application over foam plastic sheathing to support cladding weight is specified in Table 2603.12.2. This value is based on furring material, framing member, fastener type, minimum size, minimum penetration into wall framing, and other factors.

2603.13 Cladding attachment over foam sheathing to wood framing. Cladding shall be specified and installed in accordance with Chapter 14 and the cladding manufacturer's installation instructions. Where used, furring and furring

===== Page 1834 =====
attachments shall be designed to resist design loads determined in accordance with Chapter 16. In addition, the cladding or furring attachments through foam sheathing to framing shall meet or exceed the minimum fastening requirements of Section 2603.13.1 or 2603.13.2, or an approved design for support of cladding weight.

## Exceptions:

1. Where the cladding manufacturer has provided approved installation instructions for application over foam sheathing, those requirements shall apply.

2. For exterior insulation and finish systems, refer to Section 1407.

3. For anchored masonry or stone veneer installed over foam sheathing, refer to Section 1404.

This section addresses attachment of cladding through foam sheathing to wall construction of wood framing. The requirements are based on a project sponsored by the New York State Energy Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA) and the Steel Framing Alliance. The purpose of the NYSERDA project was to develop prescriptive fastening requirements for cladding materials installed over foam sheathing to ensure adequate performance. The project included testing of cladding attachments through various thicknesses of foam sheathing using various fastener types on steel frame wall assemblies. Supplemental testing also was sponsored by the Foam Sheathing Coalition to address attachments to wood framing. The resulting data are included in the data set analyzed and presented in the NYSERDA project report. The proposed cladding attachment requirements and foam sheathing thickness limits are based on rational analysis verified by the extensive test data to control cladding connection movement to not more than 0.38 mm slip under cladding weight or dead load. This deflection-controlled approach resulted in safety factors commonly in the range of 5 to 8 relative to average shear capacity.

2603.13.1 Direct attachment. Where cladding is installed directly over foam sheathing without the use of furring, minimum fastening requirements to support the cladding weight shall be as specified in Table 2603.12.1.

This section prescribes fastening requirements for cladding installed without furring directly over a foam sheathing. See the commentary to Section 2603.13 for a discussion of the derivation of these fasteners and values.

Cladding minimum fastening requirements for direct attachment over foam plastic sheathing to support cladding weight is specified in Table 2603.13.1. This value is based on cladding fastener type, minimum size, cladding fastener vertical spacing, and other factors.

2603.13.2 Fured cladding attachment. Where wood furring is used to attach cladding over foam sheathing, furring minimum fastening requirements to support the cladding weight shall be as specified in Table 2603.13.2. Where placed horizontally, wood furring shall be preservative-treated wood in accordance with Section 2303.1.9 or naturally durable wood and fasteners shall be corrosion resistant in accordance with Section 2304.10.6.

This section prescribes fastening requirements for cladding installed over steel or wood furring that is installed over foam sheathing. See commentary to Section 2603.13 for a discussion of the derivation of these fasteners and values. This section also prescribes minimum specifications for wood and steel framing.

Furring minimum fastening requirements for application over foam plastic sheathing to support cladding weight is specified in Table 2603.13.2. This value is based on furring material, framing member, fastener type, minimum size, minimum penetration into wall framing, and other factors.

## SECTION 2604 INTERIOR FINISH AND TRIM

2604.1 General. Plastic materials installed as interior finish or trim shall comply with Chapter 8. Foam plastics shall only be installed as interior finish where approved in accordance with the special provisions of Section 2603.9. Foam plastics that are used as interior finish shall also meet the flame spread and smoke-developed index requirements for interior finish in accordance with Chapter 8. Foam plastics installed as interior trim shall comply with Section 2604.2.

Plastic materials used as interior finish that are neither light transmitting, nor foam are required to comply with Chapter 8. Foam plastic used as interior finish is to be in accordance with the special approval provisions of Section 2603.10 and meet the flame spread and smoke developed index requirements of Chapter 8 for interior finish. Foam plastics installed as interior trim are required to comply with Section 2604.2. It should be noted that SBC 801 addresses foam plastic trim in existing buildings in the same manner.

2604.1.1 Plenums. Foam plastics installed in plenums as interior wall or ceiling finish shall comply with Section 2603.7. Foam plastics installed in plenums as interior trim shall comply with Sections 2604.2 and 2603.7.

===== Page 1835 =====
This section serves as a reference to Section 2603.7 for limitations on foam plastic used as interior finish in plenums and provides additional requirements for interior trim as provided in Section 2604.2.

2604.2 Interior trim. Foam plastic used as interior trim shall comply with Sections 2604.2.1 through 2604.2.4.

This section identifies the subsections that apply to interior trim requirements.

2604.2.1 Density. The minimum density of the interior trim shall be 320 kg per  \( m^{3} \) .

In order to qualify as interior trim, the density of materials must be at least 320 kg per  \( m^{3} \) . The intent was to separate those materials used for trim from those intended for use as insulation. The 320 kg per  \( m^{3} \)  value was selected because it was approximately midway between the densities commonly used for insulations and for trim when this provision was added to the code. Most foam plastic insulation was, and still is, in the range of 16 to 40 kg per  \( m^{3} \) , with very few materials over 81 kg per  \( m^{3} \) . Foam plastic trim was manufactured in a density range of 481 to 721 kg per  \( m^{3} \)  when the density provision was originally incorporated in the code.

2604.2.2 Thickness. The maximum thickness of the interior trim shall be 12.5 mm and the maximum width shall be 200 mm.

Even though other trim materials are not limited in dimension, the maximum thickness and width of foam plastic trim is limited to 12.5 mm and 200 mm, respectively. These dimensions were selected because they were typical of the maximums being produced at the time this provision was included in the code.

2604.2.3 Area limitation. The interior trim shall not constitute more than 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling areas to which it is attached. Trim cannot constitute more than 10 percent of the wall or ceiling area of a room. This limitation is simply a restatement of the general requirement for all combustible trim, which appears in Section 806.7.

2604.2.4 Flame spread. The flame spread index shall not exceed 75 where tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. The smoke-developed index shall not be limited.

Exception: When the interior trim material has been tested as an interior finish in accordance with NFPA 286 and complies with the acceptance criteria in Section 803.1.1.1, it shall not be required to be tested for flame spread index in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

The flame spread index must not be greater than 75 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 263. The value of 75 was selected to be consistent with the requirement for foam plastic insulation, even though other materials used as trim are permitted to have flame spread indexes of up to 200 in many locations. The smoke-developed index is not regulated. The exception allows for foam plastic to be used as an interior trim under the same conditions that other materials are allowed as interior finishes. This is based on the fact that, historically, the codes have required less-stringent flame spread and smoke development index criteria for interior trim as compared to those for interior finish, based on the area restrictions on interior trim. The conditions for acceptance are based on several acceptance criteria applied after testing of the foam plastic in accordance with NFPA 286 (see commentary, Section 803.1.1.1 for more information).

## SECTION 2605 PLASTIC VENEER

2605.1 Interior use. Where used within a building, plastic veneer shall comply with the interior finish requirements of Chapter 8.

Plastic veneer may be used inside a building if it meets the finish requirements of Chapter 8.

2605.2 Exterior use. Exterior plastic veneer, other than plastic siding, shall be permitted to be installed on the exterior walls of buildings of any type of construction in accordance with all of the following requirements:

1 Plastic veneer shall comply with Section 2606.4.

2 Plastic veneer shall not be attached to any exterior wall to a height greater than 15 m above grade.

3 Sections of plastic veneer shall not exceed 28  \( m^{2} \)  in area and shall be separated by not less than 1.2 m vertically.

Exception: The area and separation requirements and the smoke-density limitation are not applicable to plastic veneer applied to buildings constructed of Type VB construction, provided the walls are not required to have a fire-resistance rating.

Exterior plastic veneer, not including plastic siding, must be an approved Class CC1 or CC2 plastic material in accordance with the specifications in Section 2606.4, and meet all three of the requirements in this section for height, area and separation. The classifications within Section 2606.4 are combustibility classifications. Note that plastic siding requirements are contained in Section 2605.3.

2605.3 Plastic siding. Plastic siding shall comply with the requirements of Sections 1403 and 1404.

===== Page 1836 =====
Plastic siding is used as an exterior veneer finish material. The purpose of this section is to refer the code user back to Chapter 14, specifically Sections 1403 and 1404, for the requirements related to plastic siding used on the exterior side of exterior walls.

## SECTION 2606 LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTICS

2606.1 General. The provisions of this section and Sections 2607 through 2611 shall govern the quality and methods of application of light-transmitting plastics for use as light transmitting materials in buildings and structures. Foam plastics shall comply with Section 2603. Light-transmitting plastic materials that meet the other code requirements for walls and roofs shall be permitted to be used in accordance with the other applicable chapters of the code.

Section 2606 contains the provisions for light-transmitting plastics. It specifies both the requirements for an approved light-transmitting plastic and the fire properties of materials. It also requires adequate structural properties of materials and assemblies, and specific installation methods for various applications.

2606.2 Approval for use. Sufficient technical data shall be submitted to substantiate the proposed use of any light-transmitting material, as approved by the building official and subject to the requirements of this section.

Before the material can be used, sufficient data is to be submitted to the building official for approval.

2606.3 Identification. Each unit or package of light-transmitting plastic shall be identified with a mark or decal satisfactory to the building official, which includes identification as to the material classification.

The material or its packaging must be marked Class CC1 or CC2 plastic.

2606.4 Specifications. Light-transmitting plastics, including thermoplastic, thermosetting or reinforced thermosetting plastic material, shall have a self-ignition temperature of  \( 343^{\circ} \) C or greater where tested in accordance with ASTM D1929; a smoke-developed index not greater than 450 where tested in the manner intended for use in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723, or a maximum average smoke density rating not greater than 75 where tested in the thickness intended for use in accordance with ASTM D2843 and shall conform to one of the following combustibility classifications:

Class CC1: Plastic materials that have a burning extent of 25 mm or less where tested at a nominal thickness of 1.5 mm, or in the thickness intended for use, in accordance with ASTM D635.

Class CC2: Plastic materials that have a burning rate of 1 mm/s or less where tested at a nominal thickness of 1.5 mm, or in the thickness intended for use, in accordance with ASTM D635.

An approved material may be either thermoplastic, thermosetting or reinforced thermosetting. Approved plastics require a minimum self-ignition temperature of  \( 343^{\circ} \) C when tested in accordance with ASTM D1929. This temperature excludes the use of easily ignited plastic materials such as cellulose nitrate, which ignites at a temperature of about  \( 149^{\circ} \) C. For comparative purposes, untreated wood and paper ignite at about  \( 260^{\circ} \) C.

In order for a plastic to be approved, its smoke-developed index or smoke density rating is limited and must be evaluated by one of two test methods prescribed (smoke-developed index limited to 450 by ASTM E84 or UL 723, or a maximum average smoke density rating of 75 by ASTM D2843). For comparative purposes, these smoke-developed values are the maximum that can be expected from some wood products tested under similar conditions; however, there is no intent to indicate a correlation between the results from the two test methods.

Approved light-transmitting plastics are to be tested in accordance with ASTM D635 and be of combustibility Class CC1 or CC2. Class CC1 plastic materials burn at a slower rate than Class CC2 plastics. Class CC1 plastics generally consist of polycarbonate materials whereas Class CC2 plastics consist of acrylics. Thermoplastic materials are those plastics that will melt when heated and are formed into their final shape utilizing this property. Most light-transmitting plastic products are flat or formed sheets.

Thermosetting materials are those plastics that cure with heat and may generate heat during curing but will not melt by heating after curing. They are formed into their final product shape before or during curing, except for possible machining.

2606.5 Structural requirements. Light-transmitting plastic materials in their assembly shall be of adequate strength and durability to withstand the loads indicated in Chapter 16. Technical data shall be submitted to establish stresses, maximum unsupported spans and such other information for the various thicknesses and forms used as deemed necessary by the building official.

Light-transmitting plastic applications must meet the necessary structural load requirements. For example, glazing assemblies must be able to withstand the imposed wind loads. It is the intent of this

===== Page 1837 =====
section that durability includes weatherability for those applications subjected to outdoor exposure. Technical information to support the structural integrity is to be submitted to the building official as he or she deems necessary.

2606.6 Fastening. Fastening shall be adequate to withstand the loads in Chapter 16. Proper allowance shall be made for expansion and contraction of light-transmitting plastic materials in accordance with accepted data on the coefficient of expansion of the material and other material in conjunction with which it is employed.

The design loads for the assembly, members and fasteners are specified in Chapter 16. Adequate provision must be made for movement caused by the differential expansion expected from the different types of materials connected. This is especially important with plastics since they usually have coefficients of expansion that are greater than the materials to which they are connected.

2606.7 Light-diffusing systems. Unless the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, light-diffusing systems shall not be installed in the following occupancies and locations:

1 Group A with an occupant load of 1,000 or more.

2 Theaters with a stage and proscenium opening and an occupant load of 700 or more.

3 Group I-2.

4 Group I-3.

5 Interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways.

Light-diffusing systems are not permitted in the four occupancies listed in Items 1 through 4 in this section, nor in exits in any group, unless the building is protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13. The intent is to limit the use of combustible materials in occupancies without sprinkler protection. These occupancies are generally recognized as being potentially more hazardous for the building occupants in the event of fire. The specific restriction for nonprinklered buildings of Groups I-2 and I-3 is based on the physical restraint or incapacitation of the occupants.

2606.7.1 Support. Light-transmitting plastic diffusers shall be supported directly or indirectly from ceiling or roof construction by use of noncombustible hangers. Hangers shall be not less than No. 12 steel-wire gage (2.5 mm) galvanized wire or equivalent.
This section specifies that all hangers supporting the plastic diffusers must be of steel wire at least 2.5 mm in diameter or equivalent. It is important that noncombustible supports be used because the original test data were generated on these types of assemblies.

2606.7.2 Installation. Light-transmitting plastic diffusers shall comply with Chapter 8 unless the light-transmitting plastic diffusers will fall from the mountings before igniting, at an ambient temperature of not less than  \( 93^{\circ} \) C below the ignition temperature of the panels. The panels shall remain in place at an ambient room temperature of  \( 79^{\circ} \) C for a period of not less than 15 minutes.

Diffusers must also comply with Chapter 8 unless the plastic panels will fall from their mountings at an ambient temperature of at least  \( 93^{\circ} \) C below their ignition temperature. The intent is to regulate panels that remain in place in the same manner as interior finish and to eliminate surface flame spread requirements for materials that will not burn while remaining in place.

The code requires that all panels must remain in place for at least 15 minutes at an ambient room temperature of  \( 79^{\circ} \) C. The intent of this requirement is to avoid a panic situation that could arise from the premature dropping of ceiling panels.

2606.7.3 Size limitations. Individual panels or units shall not exceed 3 m in length nor 2.8 m \( ^{2} \)  in area.

This section states the maximum length [3 m] and area 2.8 m \( ^{2} \)  of any single panel. The intent is to limit the size of panels expected to fall from place if the ambient room temperature at the ceiling were to reach  \( 79^{\circ} \) C, in order to avoid possible obstructions and injury caused by the fallen panels.

2606.7.4 Fire suppression system. In buildings that are equipped throughout with automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, plastic light-diffusing systems shall be protected both above and below unless the sprinkler system has been specifically approved for installation only above the light-diffusing system, or the light-diffusing system is listed and labeled in accordance with UL 723S. Areas of light-diffusing systems that are protected in accordance with this section shall not be limited.

When buildings are required to have approved automatic sprinkler systems throughout, sprinkler protection must be provided both above and below the light-diffusing system. A sprinkler system is permitted to be installed above the light-diffusing system when the assembly is designed for this use and specifically approved by the building official. In

===== Page 1838 =====
2021, the code was updated to allow drop-out light-diffusing systems in accordance with UL 723S, Drop-Out Ceilings Installed Beneath Automatic Sprinklers. The intent is that when specific approval is granted, it is based on appropriate test results related to end use. When sprinkler protection is provided, the area of the light-diffusing system is not subject to the area limitations of Section 2606.7.3 since the likelihood of such panels dropping is decreased.

2606.7.5 Electrical luminaires. Light-transmitting plastic panels and light-diffuser panels that are installed in approved electrical luminaires shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 8 unless the light-transmitting plastic panels conform to the requirements of Section 2606.7.2. The area of approved light-transmitting plastic materials that is used in required exits or corridors shall not exceed 30 percent of the aggregate area of the ceiling in which such panels are installed, unless the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

Plastic light-transmitting and diffuser panels in electrical luminaires are required to comply with Chapter 8 or the installation requirements of Section 2606.7.2. Additionally, the aggregate ceiling area of such panels is limited to 30 percent in required exits and corridors, unless the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 13. The intent of this section is to regulate luminaires the same as other ceiling finish panels. It also restricts the use of combustible materials in required exits and corridors while giving recognition to the benefit of automatic sprinkler systems.

2606.8 Partitions. Light-transmitting plastics used in or as partitions shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 6 and 8.

When light-transmitting plastics are used in or as partitions, they must comply with the requirements of Chapter 6 and 8. The intent is to regulate light-transmitting plastics with the same requirements as other materials used within a building.

2606.9 Bathroom accessories. Light-transmitting plastics shall be permitted as glazing in shower stalls, shower doors, bathtub enclosures and similar accessory units. Safety glazing shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 24.

Approved plastics are permitted as glazing in a variety of uses in bathrooms. When an approved Class CC1 or CC2 plastic material is used for glazing shower stalls, shower doors, bathtub enclosures or other bathroom accessories, it must meet the human impact requirements of CPSC 16 CFR, Part 1201 or ANSI Z97.1 under Section 2406.2.
2606.10 Awnings, patio covers and similar structures. Awnings constructed of light-transmitting plastics shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions specified in Section 3105 and Chapter 32 for projections. Patio covers constructed of light-transmitting plastics shall comply with Section 2606. Light-transmitting plastics used in canopies at motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall comply with Section 2606, except as modified by Section 406.7.2.

Light-transmitting plastics used as awnings and similar structures must meet the general performance requirements of other appropriate sections of the code in addition to the requirements found in Chapter 26.

2606.11 Greenhouses. Light-transmitting plastics shall be permitted in lieu of glass in greenhouses.

Greenhouses may be constructed of any type of approved plastic material that meets the requirements of Section 2606.

2606.12 Solar collectors. Light-transmitting plastic covers on solar collectors having noncombustible sides and bottoms shall be permitted on buildings not over three stories above grade plane or 830 m \( ^{2} \)  in total floor area, provided that the light-transmitting plastic cover does not exceed 33.33 percent of the roof area for CC1 materials or 25 percent of the roof area for CC2 materials.

Exception: Light-transmitting plastic covers having a thickness of 0.3 mm or less shall be permitted to be of any plastic material provided that the area of the solar collectors does not exceed 33.33 percent of the roof area.

Approved light-transmitting plastics can be used for solar collector covers that meet the requirements of Section 2606.12. Basically, the size and height of the building is limited and, depending on the combustibility, two different maximums are provided. Any plastic material may be used as solar collector covers provided that the cover thickness does not exceed 0.25 mm and the collector does not exceed 33.33 percent of the roof area. Essentially the fire hazard only exists on the roof, which poses a minimal threat to occupants, initially.

## SECTION 2607 LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC WALL PANELS

2607.1 General. Light-transmitting plastics shall not be used as wall panels in exterior walls in occupancies in Groups A-1, A-2, H, I-2 and I-3. In other groups, light-transmitting plastics shall be

===== Page 1839 =====
permitted to be used as wall panels in exterior walls, provided that the walls are not required to have a fire resistance rating and the installation conforms to the requirements of this section. Such panels shall be erected and anchored on a foundation, waterproofed or otherwise protected from moisture absorption and sealed with a coat of mastic or other approved waterproof coating. Light-transmitting plastic wall panels shall comply with Section 2606.

Section 2607 establishes requirements for the use of plastic panels as exterior walls. Plastic wall panels are permitted to be used in most occupancies except those with dense occupant loads or where the occupants are confined or otherwise impaired. The size and quantity of plastic wall panels are also regulated by this section. These panels must also comply with the applicable provisions of Section 2606, which governs all light-transmitting plastics.

Plastic wall panels are permitted to be used in occupancies classified as Groups A-3, A-4, A-5, B, E, F-1, F-2, I-1, M, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, S-1, S-2 and U.

They may not be used in occupancies where the generated products of combustion would significantly impair the egress of the impaired, confined or crowded occupants.

As with any exterior covering, plastic wall panels must be adequately fastened in a permanent manner. To reduce the chance of water infiltration into the plastic wall panels, they must be erected and anchored on a base that is protected from water absorption. Additionally, the plastic wall panel itself must be sealed with a waterproof coating. These types of combustible wall panels are not permitted where the exterior walls are required to be fire-resistance rated.

2607.2 Installation. Exterior wall panels installed as provided for herein shall not alter the type of construction classification of the building.

Plastic is a combustible material. The use of light transmitting plastic wall panels is permitted, however, without downgrading the type of construction. This exception is also clarified in Section 603.1, Item 14, for Type I and II construction; therefore, the use of light-transmitting plastic wall panels is permitted in all types of construction. These types of combustible wall panels, however, are not permitted where the exterior walls are required to be fire-resistance rated (see Section 2607.1).

2607.3 Height limitation. Light-transmitting plastics shall not be installed more than 23 m above grade plane.

Plastic wall panels are not permitted to be installed greater than 23 m above grade plane. The 23 m threshold is the highest elevation that can be reached by hose lines on the ground. Be aware that Table 504.3 also places height limitations on structures. In some cases, the limitations of Table 504.3 may be more restrictive than those of Section 2607.3. At all times, the most restrictive requirement prevails.

2607.4 Area limitation and separation. The maximum area of a single wall panel and minimum vertical and horizontal separation requirements for exterior light-transmitting plastic wall panels shall be as provided for in Table 2607.4. The maximum percentage of wall area of any story in light-transmitting plastic wall panels shall not exceed that indicated in Table 2607.4 or the percentage of unprotected openings permitted by Section 705.8, whichever is smaller.

## Exceptions:

1. In structures provided with approved flame barriers extending 750 mm beyond the exterior wall in the plane of the floor, a vertical separation is not required at the floor except that provided by the vertical thickness of the flame barrier projection.

2. Veneers of approved weather-resistant light-transmitting plastics used as exterior siding in buildings of Type V construction in compliance with Section 1405.

3. The area of light-transmitting plastic wall panels in exterior walls of greenhouses shall be exempt from the area limitations of Table 2607.4 but shall be limited as required for unprotected openings in accordance with Section 705.8.

* Refer to Table 2607.4 for area limitations of single wall panels and the minimum separation requirements between adjacent panels. The maximum percentage of wall area faced with plastic panels is limited by Table 2607.4, as well as by Section 705.8.

At all times, the most restrictive requirement prevails. Vertical separation of panels (see Table 2607.4) is not required where continuous architectural projections create at least a 750 mm barrier (called a flame barrier) between adjacent panels.

Under most conditions, this flame barrier will delay or prevent vertical fire spread from one story to the next. This horizontal barrier is seen as protection equivalent to the vertical separation typically required by Table 2607.4 (see Commentary Figure 2607.4). Veneers of approved exterior light-transmitting plastic siding, installed in compliance with Section 1405, of Type V construction are exempt from the area limitations and separation requirements. Greenhouse walls can have an

===== Page 1840 =====
unlimited area of approved light-transmitting wall panels, unless limited by the unprotected opening requirements of Section 705.8.

Table 2607.4 establishes size and separation limitations for exterior plastic wall panels. The requirements of this table are not applicable to plastic exterior siding meeting the exceptions to Section 2607.4. The requirements are determined by the type of plastic material (Class CC1 or CC2) and fire separation distance. Plastic wall panels are permitted only where a minimum fire separation distance of 1.8 m is provided. The vertical separation requirements can be modified by Section 2607.4 (see Table 2607.4, Note b). The maximum area limitations of a single panel and the maximum percentage area of an exterior wall can be doubled where the structure is completely sprinkled in accordance with NFPA 13 (see Section 2607.5).

2607.5 Automatic sprinkler system. Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the maximum percentage area of exterior wall in any story in light-transmitting plastic wall panels and the maximum square meters of a single area given in Table 2607.4 shall be increased 100 percent, but the area of light-transmitting plastic wall panels shall not exceed 50 percent of the wall area in any story, or the area permitted by Section 705.8 for unprotected openings, whichever is smaller. These installations shall not be installed more than 23 m above grade plane.

The extra protection provided by a complete NFPA 13 automatic fire sprinkler system enables some of the limitations placed on light-transmitting plastic wall panels to be reduced. In order for these modifications to apply, the structure must be sprinkled throughout. When this protection is achieved, the single panel size and exterior wall area limitations can be doubled. At no time, however, can the area of wall panels per story exceed 50 percent of the wall area of that story. The percentage limitation of Section 705.8 for unprotected openings is also applicable. Light-transmitting wall panels are not permitted to be installed more than 23 m above grade plane. The 23 m threshold is the highest elevation that can be reached by hose lines on the ground.

2607.6 Combinations of glazing and wall panels. Combinations of light-transmitting plastic glazing and light-transmitting plastic wall panels shall be subject to the area, height and percentage limitations and the separation requirements applicable to the class of light-transmitting plastic as prescribed for light-transmitting plastic wall panel installations.

Plastic glazing and plastic wall panels display equivalent fire characteristics. Therefore, where plastic glazing (regulated by Section 2608) and plastic wall panels are both used, the aggregate area of plastics must be in compliance with the limitations and requirements of Table 2607.4.

## SECTION 2608 LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC GLAZING

2608.1 Buildings of Type VB construction. Openings in the exterior walls of buildings of Type VB construction, where not required to be protected by Section 705, shall be permitted to be glazed or equipped with light-transmitting plastic. Light-transmitting plastic glazing shall comply with Section 2606.

This section restricts the use of plastics to openings that are not required to have a fire protection rating. The requirement for walls, and their openings, to be protected is dependent on their fire separation distance (see Section 705).

2608.2 Buildings of other types of construction. Openings in the exterior walls of buildings of types of construction other than Type VB, where not required to be protected by Section 705, shall be permitted to be glazed or equipped with light-transmitting plastic in accordance with Section 2606 and all of the following:

1 The aggregate area of light-transmitting plastic glazing shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of any wall face of the story in which it is installed. The area of a single pane of glazing installed above the first story above grade plane shall not exceed 1.5 m \( ^{2} \)  and the vertical dimension of a single pane shall not exceed 1.2 m.

Exception: Where an automatic sprinkler system is provided throughout in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the area of allowable glazing shall be increased to not more than 50 percent of the wall face of the story in which it is installed with no limit on the maximum dimension or area of a single pane of glazing.

2 Approved flame barriers extending 750 mm beyond the exterior wall in the plane of the floor, or vertical panels not less than 1.2 m in height, shall be installed between glazed units located in adjacent stories.

Exception: Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler

===== Page 1841 =====
system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

3 Light-transmitting plastics shall not be installed more than 23 m above grade level.
Exception: Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

In addition to restricting the use of plastic glazing to exterior wall openings that are not required to have a fire protection rating, this section specifies the maximum area within a wall that openings can occupy. An opening that has plastic as the glazing material is essentially treated the same as an unprotected glass opening.

To limit the spread of fire, the allowable area of plastic glazing is limited to the smaller area determined when applying conditions. The first condition restricts the area of plastic glazing to 25 percent of the wall area of the story. The second condition restricts the area of plastics to that of the unprotected openings permitted in Section 705. The exception doubles the amount of wall area that is allowed to be glazed with plastic when an approved automatic sprinkler system is installed. The allowable areas are increased to 50 percent of the wall area of the story with no limit on the maximum dimension or area of a single pane of glazing. Consistent with other provisions to limit fire spread, this section places restrictions on the size and vertical separation of plastic glazing. The 1.2 m vertical separation is widely accepted as adequate for spandrels and other intervening construction between floors.

The 23 m height limitation is generally accepted as the maximum height attainable by fire-fighting apparatus. If sprinklers are provided, the need for such height restrictions is lessened.

## SECTION 2609 LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC ROOF PANELS

2609.1 General. Light-transmitting plastic roof panels shall comply with this section and Section 2606. Light-transmitting plastic roof panels shall not be installed in Groups H, I-2 and I-3. In all other groups, light-transmitting plastic roof panels shall comply with any one of the following conditions:

1 The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2 The roof construction is not required to have a fire resistance rating by Table 601.

3 The roof panels meet the requirements for roof coverings in accordance with Chapter 15.
This section establishes general requirements for light-transmitting plastic roof panels. These requirements are similar in nature to the other light-transmitting plastic provisions of this chapter. The requirements are intended to control the use of combustible construction material (i.e., light-transmitting plastics). These provisions specifically detail where roof panels may be used and any accompanying conditions that are required. Occupancies in Groups H, I-2 and I-3 may not use light-transmitting plastic roof panels. Buildings or structures containing all other groups may use the roof panels, but at least one of the three conditions listed must be present. The first condition requires the structure under consideration to be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13. The second condition allows a structure that is not sprinkled to contain plastic roof panels if Table 601 of the code does not require any fire-resistance ratings for the roof construction, including beams, trusses, framing, arches and roof decks (based on the type of construction and the distance between the floor and lowest roof member). The final condition that allows plastic roof panels in certain structures is that panels meet the requirements for roof coverings in Chapter 15.

2609.2 Separation. Individual roof panels shall be separated from each other by a distance of not less than 1.2 m measured in a horizontal plane.

Exceptions:

1. The separation between roof panels is not required in a building equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2. The separation between roof panels is not required in low-hazard occupancy buildings complying with the conditions of Section 2609.4, Exception 2 or 3.

The separation requirements for plastic roof panels are established herein. Individual light-transmitting plastic roof panels are limited in area by the provisions of Section 2609.4. This section provides the separation distances necessary between the individual roof panels to isolate the fire hazard associated with this combustible material.

The 1.2 m minimum separation distance required between each individual roof panel must be measured in a horizontal plane (see Commentary Figure 2609.2).

There are two exceptions in the code pertaining to the separation requirements. Any structure that is equipped with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13, or low-hazard occupancy buildings complying with Exception 2 or 3 of Section

===== Page 1842 =====
2609.4, are exempt from the separation requirements.

2609.3 Location. Where exterior wall openings are required to be protected by Section 705.8, a roof panel shall not be installed within 1.8 m of such exterior wall.

This section provides requirements as to where light transmitting plastic roof panels may be located in relation to the exterior walls of buildings or structures.

Again, limitations are included as to where these panels of combustible construction can be located in relation to adjacent fire hazards. These provisions are determined to be applicable from the requirements for fire-resistant-rated exterior walls and their exterior opening protectives found in Section 705.8. When certain openings in the exterior walls are required to be protected, these location requirements must be followed.

Where an exterior wall contains required exterior opening protectives, the code text requires plastic roof panels to be installed at least 1.8 m from the wall. There is no exception to this requirement for structures equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system (see Commentary Figure 2609.3).

2609.4 Area limitations. Roof panels shall be limited in area and the aggregate area of panels shall be limited by a percentage of the floor area of the room or space sheltered in accordance with Table 2609.4.

## Exceptions:

1. The area limitations of Table 2609.4 shall be permitted to be increased by 100 percent in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2. Low-hazard occupancy buildings, such as swimming pool shelters, shall be exempt from the area limitations of Table 2609.4, provided that the buildings do not exceed 465 m² in area and have a minimum fire separation distance of 3 m.

3. Greenhouses that are occupied for growing or maintaining plants, without public access, shall be exempt from the area limitations of Table 2609.4 provided they have a minimum fire separation distance of 1.2 m.

4. Roof coverings over terraces and patios in occupancies in Group R-3 shall be exempt from the area limitations of Table 2609.4 and shall be permitted with light-transmitting plastics.
This section provides certain area limitations for plastic roof panels. Plastic roof panels of combustible plastic construction exhibit high fire-hazard properties and must be limited in terms of the area of the structure. These requirements not only list the area limitations for individual panels, but also limit the aggregate or sum total of all roof panels located in the structure's roof. The aggregate area limitations are based on a floor area percentage of the room or space enclosed by the roof.

The area limitations, which are based on the class of plastic roof panels, are detailed in Table 2609.4. There are four exceptions to these area limitations. Where certain additional protection is provided or the panels are located in structures of limited hazard, the area limitations can be altered. In some cases, these exceptions increase the limitations or, in other cases, exempt certain structures from the limitations. Exception 1 increases the area limitations by 100 percent for those structures equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13. Exception 2 allows certain low-hazard buildings to be exempt from the roof panel limitations. These buildings must not exceed 465 m² in area and they must have at least 3 m of fire separation distance in order for the exception to apply. Exception 3 is for greenhouses that have at least a 1.2 m fire separation distance. Exception 4 allows occupancies in Group R-3 that have roofed-over terraces and patios to be exempt from the area limitations for roof panels. Such roof panels must be constructed with approved plastic meeting the requirements of Section 2606.

The maximum area limitations for both individual panels and aggregate areas are based on the class of plastic. These limitations are needed to restrict the use of light-transmitting plastic in roofs and roof coverings of buildings and structures. Section 2609.4 provides text that describes when these limitations are to be used. Table 2609.4 contains three different headings and only two lines of entry. The first heading is labeled "Class of plastic" and is to be used in conjunction with Section 2606.4 for determining whether the plastic used in roof panels is either Class CC1 such as a polycarbonate or CC2 such as an acrylic. Once the class of plastic of the roof panels in question has been determined, the table is to be used to determine the area limitations for such panels. The second heading in the table is identified as "Maximum area of individual roof panels (square meters)." These values

===== Page 1843 =====
provide the maximum area limitations for each individual roof panel based on the class of plastic used to manufacture the panel. These limitations are given in units of square meters. The last heading, labeled "Maximum aggregate area of roof panels (percent of floor area)," provides the aggregate amount of area that can be occupied by plastic panels located in a roof. This limitation is based on a percentage of the floor area of the room or space that is sheltered by the roof in question. The floor area in units of square meters is multiplied by the appropriate percentage for the class of plastic used. This product provides the maximum area for all plastic panels used in the roof.

## SECTION 2610 LIGHT-TRANSMITTING
PLASTIC SKYLIGHT GLAZING

2610.1 Light-transmitting plastic glazing of skylight assemblies. Skylight assemblies glazed with light-transmitting plastic shall conform to the provisions of this section and Section 2606.

Exception: Skylights in which the light-transmitting plastic conforms to the required roof-covering class in accordance with Section 1505.

This section covers horizontal and sloped applications of light-transmitting plastic skylights. By definition, sloped applications of skylights and glazing includes slopes more than 15 degrees from vertical. This section contains mounting, size and spacing limitations for these combustible assemblies.

Acrylic and polycarbonate plastics are commonly used glazing materials in skylight assemblies. The use of combustible skylights is permitted subject to the requirements of Section 2606.

The exception eliminates any added requirements for plastic skylights that meet the roofing classification for the surrounding roof covering as described in Chapter 15.

2610.1.1 Unit skylights. Unit skylights glazed with light-transmitting plastic shall comply with Section 2405.5.

The reference to Section 2405.5 is intended to highlight the specific structural considerations for unit skylights, regardless of construction materials.

2610.2 Mounting. The light-transmitting plastic shall be mounted above the plane of the roof on a curb constructed in accordance with the requirements for the type of construction classification, but not less than 100 mm above the plane of the roof. Edges of the light-transmitting plastic skylights or domes shall be protected by metal or other approved noncombustible material, or the light transmitting plastic dome or skylight shall be shown to be able to resist ignition where exposed at the edge to a flame from a Class B brand as described in ASTM E108 or UL 790. The Class B brand test shall be conducted on a skylight that is elevated to a height as specified in the manufacturer's installation instructions, but not less than 100 mm.

## Exceptions:

1. Curbs shall not be required for skylights used on roofs having a minimum slope of three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) in occupancies in Group R-3 and on buildings with a nonclassified roof covering.

2. The metal or noncombustible edge material is not required where nonclassified roof coverings are permitted.
The mounting requirements for plastic skylights are similar to those established in Section 2405.4 for glass skylights. The 100 mm curb requirement protects the skylight from flying brands, provides a wash for water running down the slope and provides a noticeable barrier to caution a person on the roof from stepping on the skylight; however, the skylight must be designed for the structural requirements of Section 2606.5. Since the edge of the plastic is more susceptible to ignition than the surface, noncombustible edge protection is required to reduce the chances of edge ignition. This requirement is only applicable when the plastic is of a type and design that does not resist the flying brand exposure as described in ASTM E108 or UL 790. This flying brand exposure test is required to be performed on the representative skylight, including mounting at a curb height specified in the manufacturer's installation instructions or 100 mm, whichever is greater.

Exception 1 is based on general field experience with plastic skylights used in one- and two-family dwellings with slopes equal to or greater than three units vertical in 12 units horizontal (3:12). Additionally, skylights in unclassified roofs are not required to be mounted on curbs. Such a skylight need not provide fire performance beyond that required for the surrounding roof covering. The basis for Exception 2 is similar to that for Exception 1. There is no need to require edge protection for the plastic when the adjacent area is an unclassified roof permitted by Section 1505.5.

2610.3 Slope. Flat or corrugated light-transmitting plastic skylights shall slope not less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (4:12). Dome-shaped skylights shall rise above the mounting flange a minimum distance equal to 10 percent of the maximum width of the dome but not less than 75 mm.

===== Page 1844 =====
Exception: Skylights that pass the Class B Burning Brand Test specified in ASTM E108 or UL 790.

As are most of the restrictions for plastic skylights, the minimum slope requirements are based on limiting the risks involved with combustible roof components. Both the slope for flat and corrugated plastic skylights and the rise for domed skylights are selected to shed flying brands. Consistent with other sections, the slope requirements are not applicable when the skylight complies with the specified requirements of ASTM E108 or UL 790.

2610.4 Maximum area of skylights. Each skylight shall have a maximum area within the curb of 9 m².

Exception: The area limitation shall not apply where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or the building is equipped with smoke and heat vents in accordance with Section 910.

The area limitation for unprinklered buildings minimizes the fire risks for plastic skylights. The 9 m² limitation does not apply to buildings provided throughout with an NFPA 13 automatic sprinkler system or equipped with smoke and heat vents in accordance with Section 910. This exception is largely academic, since contemporary plastic skylights do not normally exceed this area limitation.

2610.5 Aggregate area of skylights. The aggregate area of skylights shall not exceed 33.3 percent of the floor area of the room or space sheltered by the roof in which such skylights are installed where Class CC1 materials are utilized, and 25 percent where Class CC2 materials are utilized.

Exception: The aggregate area limitations of light-transmitting plastic skylights shall be increased 100 percent beyond the limitations set forth in this section where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or the building is equipped with smoke and heat vents in accordance with Section 910.

This section includes limitations directed to minimize the risks of fire spread. The 33.3 and 25-percent limitations based on floor area for Class CC1 (polycarbonate) and CC2 (acrylic) materials, respectively, are judged to inhibit sufficiently the spread of fire. An exception allows the percentage to be increased to 66.7 percent (Class CC1) and 50 percent (Class CC2) when an approved automatic sprinkler system is installed throughout or the building or is equipped with smoke and heat vents in accordance with Section 910. To comply with the intent of this provision, the skylights should be distributed over the entire area of the roof and not concentrated in one area.

2610.6 Separation. Skylights shall be separated from each other by a distance of not less than 1.2 m measured in a horizontal plane.

Exceptions:

1. Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2. In Group R-3, multiple skylights located above the same room or space with a combined area not exceeding the limits set forth in Section 2610.4.

As with the other items cited, the minimum 1.2 m spacing minimizes the risk of fire spread for buildings without automatic sprinklers (also see Commentary Figure 2609.2). The separation is not necessary when complete fire suppression is provided in accordance with NFPA 13 or in Group R-3, as applicable in Section 2610.4, where the skylights are located above the same room or space with a combined area not to exceed the limits of Section 2610.4.

2610.7 Location. Where exterior wall openings are required to be protected in accordance with Section 705, a skylight shall not be installed within 1.8 m of such exterior wall.

The minimum 1.8 m spacing to a fire resistance-rated wall is to minimize the risk of fire spread (also see Section 2609.3).

2610.8 Combinations of roof panels and skylights. Combinations of light-transmitting plastic roof panels and skylights shall be subject to the area and percentage limitations and separation requirements applicable to roof panel installations.

This is a precautionary statement to clarify that skylights and roof panels must be considered together when establishing size and separation limitations. When combinations of plastic skylights and roof panels occur, the area limitations of Section 2609.4 govern. As with wall panels and glazing, roof panels and skylights represent a similar combustible aspect of construction and should be addressed together.

## SECTION 2611 LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC INTERIOR SIGNS

2611.1 General. Light-transmitting plastic interior signs shall be limited as specified in Section 2606 and Sections 2611.2 through 2611.4.

Exception: Light-transmitting plastic interior wall signs in covered and open

===== Page 1845 =====
mall buildings shall comply with Section 402.6.4.

This section contains the scoping statement that requires all light-transmitting plastic materials used for interior wall signage applications to comply with the requirements of Sections 2611.2, 2611.3 and 2611.4. These requirements include the maximum allowable aggregate area of signs, maximum individual area of signs and encasement requirements. The only exceptions to these requirements are light-transmitting plastics that are used for interior wall signage in covered mall buildings, since they are regulated by Section 402.6.4. These provisions help clarify the requirements for plastic signs in all occupancies other than covered mall buildings and exterior applications. One of the most common uses of light-transmitting plastic in interior signage applications is as the facing of internally illuminated or non-illuminated wall signs (sometimes referred to as "box" or "can" signs). Typical interior applications include tenant signage, building directories, promotional or advertising sign boxes and directional signage (other than exit signage).

2611.2 Maximum area. The aggregate area of all light-transmitting plastics shall not exceed 2.2 m \( ^{2} \) .

Exception: In buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the aggregate area of light-transmitting plastics shall not exceed 9.3 m², provided that all plastics are Class CCl in accordance with Section 2606.4.

The provisions of this section limit the maximum amount of light-transmitting plastic that can be used in an individual sign or group of small signs not separated from each other in accordance with Section 2611.3. This limitation on the amount of wall area that can be covered by plastic signs is intended to minimize the potential for the spread of fire along a wall surface through involvement of the plastic signage.

When applying the provisions of Sections 2611.2 and 2611.3, the most restrictive of each section must be applied. For example, if a single sign with the maximum area of 2.2 m \( ^{2} \)  exceeds 20 percent of the wall area on which it is located, the area of the sign must be reduced to a size where the 20-percent limitation is not exceeded. Commentary Figures 2611.3(1) and 2611.3(2) give two examples of these provisions.

2611.3 Separation. Signs exceeding the aggregate area of Section 2611.2 shall be separated from each other by not less than 1200 mm horizontally and 2400 vertically.
The separation requirement applies to multiple signs that contain a combined aggregate area of light transmitting plastics greater than the amount allowed in Section 2611.2. This separation requirement is consistent with the requirement for separation of wall panels in Section 2607.4.

2611.4 Encasement. Backs of wall-mounted signs and nonilluminated portions of all signs regulated by this section shall be fully encased in metal.

The provisions of this section are intended to minimize the amount of surface that could be exposed to direct impingement by fire, and thus reduce the potential for ignition of the plastic.

## SECTION 2612 PLASTIC COMPOSITES

2612.1 General. Plastic composites shall consist of either wood/plastic composites or plastic lumber. Plastic composites shall comply with the provisions of this code and with the additional requirements of Section 2612.

This section contains minimum requirements for the use of plastic composites for exterior applications such as deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guardrail systems in buildings of Type VB construction.

Plastic composites can be plastic lumber or wood plastic composites. Both types of products are made of plastic materials with added fibrous materials to provide stiffness. There are some differences between the two, but they are relatively subtle. Wood plastic composites contain wood materials or cellulosic materials (normally over 50 percent) as the primary fiber that provides the stiffness. Plastic lumber materials contain primarily plastic (normally over 50 percent) and use a variety of materials to provide stiffness, often fiberglass. ASTM committee D07 (on wood) issued ASTM D7032, Standard Specification for Establishing Performance Ratings for Wood-Plastic Composite and Plastic Lumber Deck Boards, Stair Treads, Guards and Handrails, presently referenced in this section and in SBC 1101/1102 and in the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code (IWUIC).

Numerous plastic lumber decks are used throughout the country. The ICC Evaluation Services recognizes both types of materials under Acceptance Criteria AC 174, Acceptance Criteria for Deck Board Span Ratings and Guardrail Systems (Guards and Handrails).

2612.2 Labeling. Plastic composite deck boards and stair treads, or their packaging, shall bear a label that indicates compliance with ASTM D7032 and includes the allowable load and maximum allowable span determined in accordance with ASTM D7032. Plastic composite handrails and

===== Page 1846 =====
guards, or their packaging, shall bear a label that indicates compliance with ASTM D7032 and includes the maximum allowable span determined in accordance with ASTM D7032.

The requirement for a label on the product or packaging leverages the definition of "label" in Chapter 2. Such labels, applied on the product by the manufacturer, must contain the name of the manufacturer, the function and performance characteristics of the product or material, the name and identification of an approved agency and an indication that the representative sample of the product or material has been tested and evaluated by an approved agency. See also "Manufacturer's designation" and "Mark." This requirement helps to ensure that plastic composite decking and guards will meet the performance requirements of the code.

2612.3 Flame spread index. Plastic composite composite deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guards shall exhibit a flame spread index not exceeding 200 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 with the test specimen remaining in place during the test.

Exception: Materials determined to be noncombustible in accordance with Section 703.3.

As with other combustible materials addressed in this code, the spread of flame is a concern. This section limits the flame spread index to a maximum of 200 when tested in accordance with the referenced test methods. The exception appropriately allows for noncombustible materials without flame spread testing.

2612.4 Termite and decay resistance. Where required by Section 2304.12 plastic composite deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guards containing wood, cellulosic or any other biodegradable materials shall be termite and decay resistant as determined in accordance with ASTM D7032.

Specification ASTM D7032 requires the material to comply with bio deterioration tests (decay, fungi and termite resistance) if the material contains wood, cellulosic or other biodegradable materials. Resistance to termites is assessed via ASTM D3345 or AWPA E1 and resistance to fungal decay is in accordance with ASTM D1413, ASTM D2017 or AWPA E10.

2612.5 Construction requirements. Plastic composites meeting the requirements of Section 2612 shall be permitted to be used as exterior deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guards where combustible construction is permitted.

* Plastic composite deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guards are allowed where combustible construction is permitted on the exterior of the building.

Type VB construction allows for the use of many combustible elements of building construction.

2612.5.1 Span rating. Plastic composites used as exterior deck boards shall have a span rating determined in accordance with ASTM D7032.

* Span ratings for deck boards must be part of the product label that is required by Section 2612.2. Typical spans for these types of deck boards range from 300 to 600 mm.

The design capacity of each plastic deck board, stair tread, handrail, and guardrail system is tested and evaluated according to product specification ASTM D7032. The testing required in ASTM D7032 addresses code requirements for deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guardrail systems.

The result of these tests determines an allowable load and span rating for deck boards and stair treads. Product labels are required to indicate verification of compliance with ASTM D7032 and provide the appropriate allowable load and span rating performance information. For example, deck board labels would identify the allowable load and span. For stair treads, ASTM D7032 requires a 7.5 kN-force concentrated load to determine the span rating. This concentrated load test for plastic composite stair treads is 2.5 times the load required in the Table 1607.1, Note f.

2612.6 Plastic composite deck board, stair treads, handrails and guards Plastic composite deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guards shall be installed in accordance with this code and the manufacturer's instructions.

* Installation of these products is typically contained in the manufacturer's instructions, whether printed or electronically available. The installation usually reflects the tested assemblies that determined the allowable loading conditions of the specific application, such as a simple deck span and typical guard and handrail segment.

## SECTION 2613 FIBER-REINFORCED POLYMER

2613.1 General. The provisions of this section shall govern the requirements and uses of fiber-reinforced polymer in and on buildings and structures.

* Fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP) composites are materials consisting of reinforcing fibers (natural or manmade) impregnated with a polymer (thermoset or thermoplastic) and are then molded and hardened into the intended shape. The reinforcement fibers (such as boron, glass, carbon, aramid) impart strength and stiffness to the composite, while the

===== Page 1847 =====
polymer resin matrix binds the fibers, providing bulk stiffness and protecting them from environmental exposure. Common terms associated with FRP composites include fiberglass or fiber-reinforced plastic, GFRP (glass fiber) or CFRP (carbon fiber).

Since the mid-1950s, FRP has been adapted to building and construction uses as opaque and translucent (light-transmitting) sheet panels; space frame skin structures; structural forms for concrete; sandwich panel structures; and, most recently, a variety of load-bearing and non-load-bearing components. Since the early 1990s, FRP composites have been used to externally strengthen concrete and masonry buildings, as well as to provide seismic strengthening to beams, columns, slabs and walls.

Typical FRP architectural products are manufactured in an open mold. Additives and various fillers incorporated in the composites enable fabricators to provide finished products with special properties, such as resistance to ultraviolet radiation, enhanced fire performance, corrosion resistance and color. Principal markets served by the composites industry are architectural/construction, such as replication of historic building ornamentation; bathware; marine; automotive/transportation; corrosion resistant products (tanks and piping); and many others. These products are increasingly being used as building materials and responsible code guidance is imperative.

2613.2 Labeling and identification. Packages and containers of fiber-reinforced polymer and their components delivered to the job site shall bear the label of an approved agency showing the manufacturer's name, product listing, product identification and information sufficient to determine that the end use will comply with the code requirements.

FRP is required to be labeled and identified in a manner similar to the existing requirements for foam plastic insulation. This requirement will provide assurance to the building official that the product in the field is the same as that tested for compliance.

2613.3 Interior finishes. Fiber-reinforced polymer used as interior finishes, decorative materials or trim shall comply with Chapter 8.

This section is intended to point the user to Chapter 8 for additional requirements for use of FRP as an interior finish. Section 2612 is not intended to be the sole location in the code for requirements for FRP. FRP must meet the requirements of the code for specific applications.

2613.3.1 Foam plastic cores. Fiber-reinforced polymer used as interior finish and which contains foam plastic cores shall comply with Chapter 8 and this chapter.
Some FRPs may be constructed as sandwich panels. These panels would have FRP on both sides of a core material. The core material provides additional support to the FRP system. Typical core materials can be, but are not limited to, balsa wood, plywood or even foam-plastic materials. The definitions for “Fiber-reinforced polymer” addresses these types of materials. When foam plastic is used as a core material and the resultant FRP is used as interior finish, the resultant FRP must comply with the requirements of Chapter 8 and 26. Since foam plastic is regulated by this chapter, it is appropriate that FRP containing foam plastic cores also be regulated by this chapter.

2613.4 Light-transmitting materials. Fiber-reinforced polymer used as light-transmitting materials shall comply with Sections 2606 through 2611 as required for the specific application.

This section refers the user to Sections 2606 through 2611 for additional requirements for use of FRP as a light-transmitting plastic element. Section 2612 is not intended to be the sole location in the code for requirements for FRP. FRP must meet the requirements of the code for specific applications.

2613.5 Exterior use. Fiber-reinforced polymer shall be permitted to be installed on the exterior walls of buildings of any type of construction when such polymers meet the requirements of Section 2603.5. Fireblocking shall be installed in accordance with Section 718.

Exceptions:

1. Compliance with Section 2603.5 is not required where all of the following conditions are met:

1.1. The fiber-reinforced polymer shall not exceed an aggregate total of 20 percent of the area of the specific wall to which it is attached, and single architectural elements shall not exceed 10 percent of the area of the specific wall to which it is attached, and no contiguous sets of architectural elements shall not exceed 10 percent of the area of the specific wall to which they are attached.

1.2. The fiber-reinforced polymer shall have a flame spread index of 25 or less. The flame spread index requirement shall not be required for coatings or paints having a thickness of less than 0.9 mm that are applied directly to the surface of the fiber-reinforced polymer.

1.3. Fireblocking complying with Section 718.2.6 shall be installed.

===== Page 1848 =====
1.4. The fiber-reinforced polymer shall be installed directly to a noncombustible substrate or be separated from the exterior wall by one of the following materials: corrosion-resistant steel having a minimum base metal thickness of 0.4 mm at any point, aluminum having a minimum thickness of 0.5 mm or other approved noncombustible material.

2. Compliance with Section 2603.5 is not required where the fiber-reinforced polymer is installed on buildings that are 12 m or less above grade and the following conditions are met:

2.1. The fiber-reinforced polymer shall meet the requirements of Section 1405.1

2.2. Where the fire separation distance is 1.5 m or less, the area of the fiber-reinforced polymer shall not exceed 10 percent of the wall area. Where the fire separation distance is greater than 1.5 m, the area of the exterior wall coverage using fiber-reinforced polymer shall not be limited.

2.3. The fiber-reinforced polymer shall have a flame spread index of 200 or less. The flame spread index requirements do not apply to coatings or paints having a thickness of less than 0.9 mm that are applied directly to the surface of the fiber-reinforced polymer.

2.4. Fireblocking complying with Section 718.2.6 shall be installed.

Section 2613.5 provides requirements that specifically address the use of FRP on the exterior of buildings. This section allows FRP to be used on the exterior of buildings of all types of construction where it meets specific requirements.

The general requirements are that FRP meets the requirements of Section 2603.5 and the requirements for fireblocking in accordance with Section 718. Section 2603.5 addresses the use of foam plastics on exterior walls of all types of construction. By using the requirements in this section, FRP must pass tests such as NFPA 285 (multistory fire test) and NFPA 268 (radiant heat test) and have Class A flame spread and smoke-developed indices, as well as meet other requirements specified in Section 2603.5. As with foam plastics, if a material can meet these requirements, it can be used as an exterior wall covering on buildings of any type of construction.
There are two exceptions to the general requirements. Exception 1 is for where FRP is used as building ornamentation, such as cornices. This set of requirements limits the area of the FRP and its flame spread index based on the percentage of the material on the wall. The area restrictions are based on potential applications and the philosophy that where larger amounts of materials are installed; the fire properties shall be more restrictive. Requirements are also provided whereby FRP shall be installed over noncombustible surfaces where fireblocking is required. This set of requirements provides assurances that the materials to be used in this application are appropriate for use and do not create any undue hazard.

Exception 2 recognizes that FRP can be used on buildings up to a height of 12 m in a manner consistent with other combustible exterior wall coverings. This is primarily because of the difficulties associated with fire-fighter access to higher portions of a building and to minimize potential injury from flying brands at high elevation. Combustible architectural trim and exterior veneers are permitted below the 12 m height even where the overall building height exceeds 12 m. Combustible trim and veneers are also permitted on buildings of Type V construction. It should be noted that although Table 504.3 limits buildings of Type V construction to 12 m in height, such buildings may be increased in height where protected with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 504.1.

Additionally, limits with respect to fire-separation distance are also provided in a manner similar to that for metal composite material panels. Further requirements for fireblocking have also been included.

## SECTION 2614 REFLECTIVE PLASTIC CORE INSULATION

2614.1 General. The provisions of this section shall govern the requirements and uses of reflective plastic core insulation in buildings and structures. Reflective plastic core insulation shall comply with the requirements of Section 2614 and of one of the following: Section 2614.3 or 2614.4.

The definition of “Reflective plastic core insulation” is given in Section 202. As stated, it is: “An insulation material less than 12.5 mm thick with at least one exterior low emittance surface and a core material containing voids or cells.”

There are a number of reflective insulation materials made using "bubble pack" plastic as the core. This is the same material that is used as a packing material for fragile items. The current definition of "Foam plastic" does not

===== Page 1849 =====
include bubble pack type materials because the "bubbles" in the materials are not formed with a foaming agent, but are mechanically formed using a stamping process. From a fire performance standpoint, these materials are predominantly plastic containing voids filled with air that support combustion.

2614.2 Identification. Packages and containers of reflective plastic core insulation delivered to the job site shall show the manufacturer's or supplier's name, product identification and information sufficient to determine that the end use will comply with the code requirements.

Unlike foam plastics, the identification required on reflective plastic core insulation is a manufacturer's self-certification and not a third-party label.

2614.3 Surface-burning characteristics. Reflective plastic core insulation shall have a flame spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 450 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. The reflective plastic core insulation shall be tested at the maximum thickness intended for use. Test specimen preparation and mounting shall be in accordance with ASTM E2599.

As with other plastic materials, reflective plastic core insulation is required to be tested for flame spread and smoke-developed indices. However, the traditional method of testing reflective plastic core foil insulation in the ASTM E84 test (using chicken wire or poultry netting and rods) produces misleading results that suggest that the reflective plastic core foil insulation is safe and meets a flame spread index of 25 or less. In fact, when reflective plastic core foil insulation is tested in a more realistic way, with fasteners, the flame spread index of some materials can far exceed 25, potentially leading to severe fires. The referenced test standard ASTM E2599 was specifically developed as the test specimen preparation and mounting method for reflective insulation materials when using ASTM E84 or UL 723.

2614.4 Room corner test heat release. Reflective plastic core insulation shall comply with the acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.1.1 when tested in accordance with NFPA 286 or UL 1715 in the manner intended for use and at the maximum thickness intended for use.

To properly evaluate the flaming, flashover, heat release rate and smoke release characteristics of the reflective plastic core insulation, testing in accordance with NFPA 286 or UL 1715 is required.

===== Page 1850 =====
## Bibliography

The following resource materials were used in the preparation of the commentary for this chapter of the code:

1 ANSI/DASMA 107-97(R 2012), Room Fire Test Standard for Garage Doors Using Foam Plastic Insulation. Cleveland, OH: Door and Access Systems Manufacturers Association, 2012.

2 ASTM D635-10, Standard Test Method for Rate of Burning and/or Extent and Time of Burning of Plastics in a Horizontal Position. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2010.

3 ASTM E84-2013A, Test Methods for Surface-burning Characteristics of Building Materials. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2013.

4 ASTM E108-2011, Test Methods for Fire Tests of Roof Coverings. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2011.

5 ASTM E119-2012A, Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2012.

6 NFPA 268-12, Standard Test Method for Determining Ignitability of Exterior Wall Assemblies Using a Radiant Heat Energy Source. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2012.

7 UL 263-11, Standard for Fire Test of Building Construction and Materials. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 2011.

8 UL 790-04, Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Roof Coverings. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 2004.

===== Page 1851 =====
TABLE 26.03.12.1
TABLE 26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26-26

===== Page 1852 =====
FURBING MINIMUM FASTENING REQUIREMENTS FOR AERIAL OVER ROAM PLASTIC SHEATHING TO SUPPORT

<table><td rowspan="2">FURBING MATERIAL<td rowspan="2">FRAINING MEMBER<td rowspan="2">FASTENER TYPE AND MINIMUM SIZE<td rowspan="2">MINIMUM PENETRATION TO WALL FRAINING (mm)<td rowspan="2">FASTENER SPACING FURBING (mm)<td colspan="3">MAXIMUM THICKNESS OF ROAM0.1 cm (0.04 in) weight0.04 cm (0.02 in) weight0.04 cm (0.02 in) weightMinimum 0.84 mm steel string of minimum 1 wood flange#8 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.030.120.141.1 mm or thicker cold-formed steel stud#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#8 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#8 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads400750.250.120.14#10 screw#10 screwSteel thickness plus 3 threads300750.250.120.14#10 screw#10

===== Page 1853 =====
CHAPTER 26 - PLASTICS

<table><td colspan="12">CLADDING FASTENER THROOTING FLOW SHEATHING INTO:CLADDING FASTENER THROOTING FLOW SHEATHING INTO:CLADDING FASTENER TYPE, AND SIZECLADDING FASTENER TYPE, AND SIZECLADDING FASTENER TYPE, AND SIZECLADDING FASTENER TYPE, AND SIZECLADDING FASTENER TYPE, AND SIZECLADDING FASTENER TYPE, AND SIZECLADDING FASTENER TYPE, AND SIZECLADDING FASTENER TYPE, AND SIZECLADDING FASTENER TYPE, AND SIZECLADDING FASTENER TYPE, AND SIZECLADDING FASTENER TYPE, AND SIZE2.825 m (4.0 m)1505026.2518.70.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.0 mm (0.12 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)2005013.7517.50.140.140.140.140.140.140.143.275 mm (1.21 in)1505013.

===== Page 1854 =====
TABLE 26-013.12
FURBING MINIMUM FASTENING REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION OVER ROAM FASTENING TO SUPPORT

<table><td rowspan="2">FURBING MATERIAL<td rowspan="2">FRAMING MEMBER<td rowspan="2">FASTENER TYPE, AND MINIMUM SIZE<td rowspan="2">MINIMUM PENTELATION TOTOWALL FRAMING (mm)<td rowspan="2">FASTENER SPACING INTERFACING (mm)<td colspan="2">MAXIMUM THICKNESS OF ROAMSHEATHING (mm)SHEATHING (mm)3.275 mm aluminum 2x Wood Stud4.05 mm aluminum31.252000.140.14Minimum 1x Wood FramingNo. 10 wood 4 screw31.253000.140.14

===== Page 1855 =====
TABLE 2607.4

AREA LIMITATION AND SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS FOR LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC WALL PANELS \( ^{a} \)

<table><td rowspan="2">FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE (meters)<td rowspan="2">CLASS OF PLASTIC<td rowspan="2">MAXIMUM PERCENTAGE AREA OF EXTERIOR WALL IN PLASTIC WALL PANELS<td rowspan="2">MAXIMUM SINGLE AREA OF PLASTIC WALL PANELS (square meter)<td colspan="2">MINIMUM SEPARATION OF PLASTIC WALL PANELS (meters)VerticalHorizontalLess than 1.8--Not PermittedNot Permitted----1.8 or more but less than 3.4CC1104.72.41.23.4 or more but less than or equal to 9.0CC2Not PermittedNot Permitted----3.4 or more but less than or equal to 9.0CC1258.01.81.23.4 or more but less than or equal to 9.0CC2156.52.41.2<td rowspan="2">Over 9.0CC150Not Limited0.9b0CC2509.31.8b0.9</table>

a. For combinations of plastic glazing and plastic wall panel areas permitted, see Section 2607.6.

b. For reductions in vertical separation allowed, see Section 2607.4.

TABLE 2609.4

AREA LIMITATIONS FOR LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC ROOF PANELS

<table>CLASS OF PLASTICMAXIMUM AREA OF INDIVIDUAL ROOF PANELS (square meters)MAXIMUM AGGREGATE AREA OF ROOF PANELS (percent of floor area)CC12830CC29.325</table>

===== Page 1856 =====
FIGURE 2603.1
FOAM PLASTIC COMPLIANCE

===== Page 1857 =====
FIGURE 2603.4.1.6
FOAM PLASTIC, ATTIC AND CRAWL SPACES

FIGURE 2603.4.1.13
FOAM PLASTIC SPRAY APPLIED TO SILL PLATE AND HEADER

===== Page 1858 =====
NO VERTICAL SEPARATION IS REQUIRED BETWEEN ADJACENT PANELS

FIGURE 2607.4
FLAME BARRIER—EXCEPTION 1 SECTION 2607.4

===== Page 1859 =====
FIGURE 2609.2
PLASTIC ROOF PANEL SEPARATION FROM OTHER PANELS

FIGURE 2609.3
PLASTIC ROOF PANEL SEPARATION FROM EXTERIOR WALL

===== Page 1860 =====
Area of Sign #1 = 2.2 m² (Max. area per section 2611.3)
Aggregate Area = 2.2 m²

Area of Wall = 10.2 m²
20% of 10.2 m² = 2 m² (Max. area per section 2611.2)
2.2 m² ≥ 2 m² : Aggregate area of signs exceeds area permitted by section 2611.2

FIGURE 2611.3(1)

MAXIMUM AREA OF LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC SIGNS—EXAMPLE 1

Area of Sign #1 = 2.2 m² (Max. area per section 2611.3)
Area of Sign #2 = 0.4 m²
Area of Sign #3 = 1.6 m²
Aggregate Area = 4.2 m²

Area of Wall = 22.8 m²
20% of 22.8 m² = 4.6 m² (Max. area per section 2611.2)
4.2 m² ≤ 4.6 m² : Aggregate area of signs complies with section 2611.2

FIGURE 2611.3(2)

MAXIMUM AREA OF LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC SIGNS—EXAMPLE 2

===== Page 1861 =====
This page left intentionally blank

