===== Page 1938 =====
# CHAPTER 31—SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION

## General Comments

Chapter 31 contains provisions that govern the construction and protection of structures with unique characteristics not addressed by other sections of the code and that require special consideration. This chapter includes requirements for signs, membrane structures, temporary structures, pedestrian walkways, telecommunication and broadcast towers, canopies and awnings, marquees, automatic vehicular gates, swimming pool enclosures, solar energy systems, greenhouses, relocatable buildings, public use restroom buildings in flood hazard areas and intermodal shipping containers. The chapter is broken down into the following sections:

Section 3101 addresses the scope of the chapter.

Section 3102 regulates membrane structures.

Section 3103 regulates structures that are erected for a period of less than 180 days.

Section 3104 regulates pedestrian walkways between buildings.

Section 3105 regulates the construction of awnings and canopies.

Section 3106 regulates the construction of marquees.

Section 3107 addresses the design, construction and maintenance of signs.

Section 3108 regulates the construction of towers and antennas that are used for radio, telephone and television transmission.

Section 3109 regulates swimming pools, spas and hot tubs by referencing SBC 1401.

Section 3110 regulates automatic vehicular gates.

Section 3111 regulates solar energy systems.

Section 3112 regulates greenhouses.

Section 3113 regulates relocatable buildings.

Section 3114 regulates public use restroom buildings in flood hazard areas.

Section 3115 regulates intermodal shipping containers.

The provisions of Chapter 31 are to be considered as additional requirements to those contained elsewhere in the code. These provisions may alter the general requirements found in other locations, but are only applicable to the specific element regulated therein. For example, the provisions for temporary construction regulate how the structure is to be built, but do not address means of egress. As such, the provisions of Chapter 10 are applicable.
The criteria in this chapter are straightforward and, in turn, lend themselves to straightforward enforcement.

## Purpose

The purpose of Chapter 31 is to locate in one place the provisions that regulate construction or protection requirements for structures having unique characteristics, such as structures that are unusually tall and not used for human occupancy, structures occupied for short periods of time, recreational structures (swimming pools) and intermodal shipping containers used as habitable structures.

## SECTION 3101 GENERAL

3101.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern special building construction including membrane structures, temporary structures, pedestrian walkways and tunnels, automatic vehicular gates, awnings and canopies, marquees, signs, towers, antennas, relocatable buildings, swimming pool enclosures and safety devices, solar energy systems, public use restroom buildings on publicly owned lands in flood hazard areas and intermodal shipping containers.

This section makes it clear that the requirements of this chapter are to be used in conjunction with the general requirements of the code. When a specific provision is contained in Chapter 31, it will take precedence over the general requirement.

## SECTION 3102 MEMBRANE STRUCTURES

3102.1 General. The provisions of Sections 3102.1 through 3102.8 shall apply to air-supported, air-inflated, membrane-covered cable, membrane-covered frame and tensile membrane structures, collectively known as membrane structures, erected for a period of 180 days or longer. Those erected for a shorter period of time shall comply with SBC 801. Membrane structures covering water storage facilities, water clarifiers, water treatment plants, sewage treatment plants, greenhouses and similar facilities not used for human occupancy are required to meet only the requirements of Sections 3102.3.1 and 3102.7. Membrane structures erected on a building, balcony, deck or other structure for any period of time shall comply with this section.

This section applies to membrane structures that are erected for a period of 180 days or longer or, in the case of membrane structures erected on buildings, balconies, decks or

===== Page 1939 =====
similar structures, for any amount of time. Some membrane structures are of the inflated type, where the air pressure is within a series of tubes, which then form the structure and keep it upright. In other structures, the interior atmosphere is pressurized and cables may be used to restrain the fabric membrane. Other types include cable-supported membrane structures in which the roof element is supported by cables and air pressure may or may not be provided. These are commonly used in sports stadiums. Membrane structures may also be framework-type structures in which the membrane is stretched over the frame to form the enclosing walls and the roof. Finally, membrane structures may consist of a membrane tensioned to provide weather protection without enclosing walls. These structures are termed tensile membrane structures and are defined in Chapter 2.

The history of regulating membrane structures dates back to 1944, when efforts were first made to control circus tent flammability after a circus fire in Hartford, Connecticut, claimed 168 lives. Early regulations required that the tent fabric be flame resistant, that adequate exiting from both the grandstands and the tent be provided and that sufficient clear space around the tent be provided to control potential ignition sources and to permit rapid emergency exiting.

Because of fire prevention code requirements, such structures were often restricted to temporary use, which at that time was defined as less than 90 days. As noted in Section 3102.1, the criterion of 180 days is used to define what is permanent and what is temporary. It should be noted that Section 3102.2 deals with both temporary and permanent tensile membrane structures. The reference to 180 days in Section 3102.2 is intended to establish membrane structures complying with this section as being outside the scope and provisions for temporary structures.

This section includes provisions for construction types, height and area limitations, and structural support. Otherwise, the other applicable sections of the code apply. So that a membrane structure will continue to provide its intended function, it must undergo continuous maintenance. Fire safety of such structures and the premises is regulated by SBC 801.

In general, this section applies to all membrane structures, regardless of the supporting mechanisms or structures, which are erected for a period of 180 days or more. Membrane structures erected for a period of less than 180 days are instead required to comply with the provisions of SBC 801. However, there are certain membrane structures that need to be regulated as permanent regardless of how long they are erected. These include membrane structures located on buildings, balconies, decks and similar structures. When a temporary membrane structure is placed in a field or parking lot, several safety features are afforded including fire separation distance from other hazards (buildings, vehicles), separation from other tents, and an unobstructed means of egress path for the uniformly located exits. When a membrane structure is placed on a building or deck, the temporary membrane structure requirements do not provide regulations for key issues associated with permanent structures, such as the means of egress or the limitation of hazardous materials. Therefore, compliance with permanent structure standards is needed. Further, the temporary membrane structure section does not contain requirements regulating the loads imposed by temporary membrane structures on a structure below.

It is also important to note that the provisions of Section 3102 apply regardless of the use or occupant load of such structures. If the structure is not intended for human occupancy, some relief is provided and compliance with only Sections 3102.3.1 and 3102.7 is required.

3102.2 Tensile membrane structures and air-supported structures. Tensile membrane structures and air-supported, including permanent and temporary structures, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE 55. The provisions in Sections 3102.3 through 3102.6 shall apply.

This section references ASCE 55, Tensile Membrane Structures. This standard provides minimum criteria for the design and performance of tensile membrane cable and rigid member structures, including frame structures, collectively known as tensile membrane structures. This would include permanent and temporary structures as noted in the text. The requirements of this section and the associated standard shall apply whether the tensile membrane structure is independent of or attached to another structure. This section does not apply to air-supported or air-inflated structures.

In addition to the scope and definitions, ASCE 55 includes chapters on membrane materials, connections, design, fabrication and erection, as well as appendices for special provisions and a procedure for determining modulus of elasticity.

3102.3 Type of construction. Noncombustible membrane structures shall be classified as Type IIB

===== Page 1940 =====
construction. Noncombustible frame or cable-supported structures covered by an approved membrane in accordance with Section 3102.3.1 shall be classified as Type IIB construction. Heavy timber frame-supported structures covered by an approved membrane in accordance with Section 3102.3.1 shall be classified as Type IV-HT construction. Other membrane structures shall be classified as Type V construction.

Exception: Plastic less than 9.1 m above any floor used in greenhouses, where occupancy by the general public is not authorized, and for aquaculture pond covers is not required to meet the fire propagation performance criteria of Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701.

Because of the limited fire-resistance capabilities of the membrane, membrane structures are usually classified as Type IIB, IV or V. These are defined as follows:

- Type IIB — Membrane structures in which the membrane is noncombustible as defined by Section 703.5; or membrane-covered structures in which the frame or cable is noncombustible and the membrane is either noncombustible or flame resistant.

- Type IV — Membrane-covered structures in which the frame is made from heavy timber and the membrane is noncombustible or flame resistant.

- Type V — Membrane structures in which the membrane is flame resistant and combustible; or membrane-covered structures in which the frame or cable is combustible, and the membrane is noncombustible or flame resistant.

In accordance with Section 602.2, a membrane-covered structure is to be considered as Type I or II construction, provided that the frame or cable complies with the provisions for Type I or II construction and the membrane structure is noncombustible, used exclusively as a roof and located more than 6 m above any floor, balcony or gallery floor level. This is similar to the provisions in Table 601 that do not require fire-resistance-rated roof construction under similar conditions.

The exception is focused on situations where testing for flame resistance is not required. The allowance is focused on situations where the risks are low and fires would likely be easier to access due to the limited height. This includes greenhouses where the public is not allowed (less than 9 m from any floor) and where membrane structures are used to cover aquaculture ponds. Essentially, the membrane materials are not required to meet the flame propagation requirements of NFPA 701. Note that NFPA 701 specifically addresses the performance of textiles and films and does not pertain to the framing members and cables. It should be noted that the exception to Section 3102.3.1 is similar but the greenhouse allowance is focused on the thickness of the membrane material versus height from the floor. This difference may be related to more rigid materials expected by Section 3103.2 and more flexible material applications within Section 3102.3.1.

3102.3.1 Membrane and interior liner material. Membranes and interior liners shall be either noncombustible as set forth in Section 703.3 or meet the fire propagation performance criteria of Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701 and the manufacturer's test protocol.

Exception: Plastic less than 0.5 mm in thickness used in greenhouses, where occupancy by the general public is not authorized, and for aquaculture pond covers is not required to meet the fire propagation performance criteria of Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701.

The membrane is a thin, flexible, impervious material capable of being supported by an air pressure of 40 mm of water column. Membranes must be noncombustible or meet the flame propagation requirements of NFPA 701, in which case they would be considered flame resistant. Greenhouses and aquaculture pond covers have an exception due to reduced risk to life safety.

Noncombustible membranes and liner materials must meet the criteria of Section 703.5, which references ASTM E136. This test is used in the determination of noncombustibility. See the commentary for Section 703.5.1 for more information on this test.

Materials that are not noncombustible are required to be flame resistant. Flame resistance is determined by testing the membrane in accordance with NFPA 701. The materials when tested in accordance with NFPA 701 must comply with the performance criteria of one of the two identified test methods. The historic “small-scale test” is no longer accepted.

Although typically not applicable to membrane structures, it should be noted that recent tests have indicated a problem with combining two fabrics that individually passed the test procedure, but in combination would not be acceptable. Therefore, if multiple layers are

===== Page 1941 =====
used, testing should demonstrate acceptable performance for the combination of materials. Both greenhouses that are not open to the public with a membrane less than 20 mil thickness and aquaculture pond covers are not required to demonstrate compliance with NFPA 701. The provision for greenhouses is based on decreased life safety risks owing to the limited number of occupants. See also commentary to Section 3102.3 for a similar exception.

3102.4 Allowable floor areas. The area of a membrane structure shall not exceed the limitations specified in Section 506.

The allowable area per floor of a membrane structure is determined using Section 506, based on the construction types established in Section 3102.3.

3102.5 Maximum height. Membrane structures shall not exceed one story, nor shall such structures exceed the height limitations in meters specified in Section 504.3.

Exception: Noncombustible membrane structures serving as roofs only.

Membrane structures are most commonly used to enclose large, open areas without intermediate structural supports such as columns. For this reason, as well as the engineering difficulties associated with multistory buildings, membrane structures are limited to one story and the maximum height permitted in accordance with Table 504.3. The height is not limited, however, if a noncombustible membrane is used as a roof.

3102.6 Mixed construction. Membrane structures shall be permitted to be utilized as specified in this section as a portion of buildings of other types of construction. Height and area limits shall be as specified for the type of construction and occupancy of the building.

Section 3102.6 applies where the membrane structure is only a portion of a larger structure built of typical “rigid” materials. If a membrane structure is completely created by the membranes, or membranes supported by a rigid frame or a cable system, then Sections 3102.3 through 3102.5 apply. Where there are additional parts of the building constructed of rigid materials, such as walls, a second story, a mezzanine or something other than a membrane and its supporting structure, then it is a mixed construction membrane structure subject to Section 3102.6. Commentary Figure 3102.6.1 illustrates a mixed construction building where a membrane is used as the roof of an otherwise rigid construction building.

For a mixed construction membrane structure, the supporting structure of the membrane must be equal to or better than that of the building to which it is attached. Where air-supported or air-inflated structures are attached as an element of a building, their area limitations are based on the building to which they are attached. For example, an air-supported membrane building for a Group A-1 occupancy of Type VB construction with an allowable area of 2045 m² would limit the area of the membrane structure to 2045 m² as well even if a noncombustible membrane structure was used.

3102.6.1 Noncombustible membrane. A noncombustible membrane shall be permitted for use as the roof or as a skylight of any building or atrium of a building of any type of construction provided that the membrane is not less than 6 m above any floor, balcony or gallery.

See Commentary Figure 3102.6.1 for an example of the application of this section. See the commentary for Section 3102.3.1 regarding the determination of a noncombustible membrane versus one complying with NFPA 701.

3102.6.1.1 Membrane. A membrane meeting the fire propagation performance criteria of Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701 shall be permitted to be used as the roof or as a skylight on buildings of Type IIB, III, IV-HT and V construction, provided that the membrane is not less than 6.1 m above any floor, balcony or gallery.

See Commentary Figure 3102.6.1 for an example of the application of this section. See the commentary for Section 3102.3.1 regarding the determination of a noncombustible membrane versus one complying with NFPA 701. Note that the materials when tested in accordance with NFPA 701 must comply with the performance criteria of one of the two identified test methods. The historic “small-scale test” is no longer accepted.

3102.7 Engineering design. The structure shall be designed and constructed to sustain dead loads; loads due to tension or inflation; live loads including wind or flood and seismic loads and in accordance with Chapter 16.

The structure must be designed and constructed to sustain all dead loads, loads caused by tensioning or inflation and live loads, including wind, flood and seismic. Chapter 16 provides criteria for design loads, except those associated with tensioning or inflation.

3102.7.1 Lateral restraint. For membrane-covered frame structures, the membrane shall not be considered to provide lateral restraint in the calculation of the capacities of the frame members.

This section is a result of a study of the collapse of the Dallas Cowboys' indoor practice facility on May 2, 2009, conducted by the National

===== Page 1942 =====
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) (Gross et al., 2010).

In its study of the collapse of the facility, a membrane-covered frame structure, NIST found that the facility was designed assuming that the tensioned exterior membrane provided lateral bracing for the frames. Had the building been designed assuming that the membrane would not provide lateral restraint, the design capacity for some frame members would have been 46 percent of the capacity required based on the assumption that the membrane provides full lateral restraint (see Table 5-5 of Gross et al., 2010).

A review of the state of the practice indicated that there is some disparity among designers of membrane-covered frame structures regarding the contribution of the membrane to the stability of the frame members. Some designers rely on the membrane to provide lateral support to the frames, while others do not. The amount of lateral restraint provided by the membrane depends on the stiffness and strength of the membrane, which are not well quantified over the lifespan of the membrane. The degree of lateral restraint also depends on the level of tension in the membrane, which is uncertain since it is a function of the initial tensioning and maintenance procedures over the life of the membrane. A particular concern is the susceptibility of the fabric material to tearing due to reasons such as wind-borne debris during windstorms, accidental cuts during installation or maintenance, or degradation of the fabric tear strength due to environmental conditions, including ultraviolet exposure. In such cases, tearing of the fabric would compromise the stability of the structural frames, which would in turn threaten the integrity of the entire structural system. In addition, tears in the fabric could introduce unbalanced lateral loads on the frame members. As a result, this section does not allow the membrane to be considered to provide lateral restraint.

3102.8 Inflation systems. Air-supported and air-inflated structures shall be provided with primary and auxiliary inflation systems to meet the minimum requirements of Sections 3102.8.1 through 3102.8.3.

While the primary inflation system is essential to the integrity of air-supported and air-inflated buildings, a secondary or auxiliary inflation system is required for all such membrane structures to prevent deflation and to allow the occupants to egress. A backup structural support system is also required for air-supported and air-inflated structures with an occupant load of more than 50 or that cover a swimming pool because of life safety considerations.

3102.8.1 Equipment requirements. This inflation system shall consist of one or more blowers and shall include provisions for automatic control to maintain the required inflation pressures. The system shall be so designed as to prevent over-pressurization of the system.

The structural integrity of air-supported and air-inflated structures depends on a reliable inflation system.

3102.8.1.1 Auxiliary inflation system. In addition to the primary inflation system, in buildings larger than  \( 140 \, m^2 \)  in area, an auxiliary inflation system shall be provided with sufficient capacity to maintain the inflation of the structure in case of primary system failure. The auxiliary inflation system shall operate automatically when there is a loss of internal pressure and when the primary blower system becomes inoperative.

As a safety precaution, such structures that exceed  \( 140 \, m^{2} \)  must also be provided with an auxiliary inflation system. The auxiliary system is required to operate automatically upon loss of internal pressure or if the primary system becomes inoperative. In accordance with Section 3102.8.2, when an auxiliary system is required, standby power is also to be provided for at least 4 hours.

3102.8.1.2 Blower equipment. Blower equipment shall meet all of the following requirements:

1 Blowers shall be powered by continuous-rated motors at the maximum power required for any flow condition as required by the structural design.

2 Blowers shall be provided with inlet screens, belt guards and other protective devices as required by the building official to provide protection from injury.

3 Blowers shall be housed within a weather-protecting structure.

4 Blowers shall be equipped with backdraft check dampers to minimize air loss when inoperative.

5 Blower inlets shall be located to provide protection from air contamination. The location of inlets shall be approved.

Safety features of the blower system for the purposes of reliability, prevention of overpressurization and personal safety include the following:

- Blowers with motors rated for continuous operation at maximum power;

- Inlet screens, belt guards and other protective devices;

===== Page 1943 =====
• Weather-protected housing for blowers;

• Backdraft check dampers to minimize air loss.

• Inlets located to prevent air contamination.

SBC 501 requires makeup air inlets to be at least 3 m from any potential source of contamination.

3102.8.2 Standby power. Wherever an auxiliary inflation system is required, an approved standby power-generating system shall be provided. The system shall be equipped with a suitable means for automatically starting the generator set upon failure of the normal electrical service and for automatic transfer and operation of all of the required electrical functions at full power within 60 seconds of such service failure. Standby power shall be capable of operating independently for not less than 4 hours.

Air-supported and air-inflated structures exceeding 140 m² are to be provided with standby power for the auxiliary inflation system. The standby power system must comply with the provisions of Section 2702 and be capable of operating for a minimum of 4 hours.

3102.8.3 Support provisions. A system capable of supporting the membrane in the event of deflation shall be provided for in air-supported and air-inflated structures having an occupant load of 50 or more or where covering a swimming pool regardless of occupant load. The support system shall be capable of maintaining membrane structures used as a roof for Type I construction not less than 6.1 m above floor or seating areas. The support system shall be capable of maintaining other membranes not less than 2.1 m above the floor, seating area or surface of the water.

To allow safe occupant egress and access for firefighting, air-supported and air-inflated structures that have an occupant load of more than 50 or cover a swimming pool are required to have a standby support system. Regardless of the occupant load, swimming pools are included because of the additional time necessary to egress when in a pool and because of the hazard that would exist if a membrane collapsed on a pool in which a person was swimming.

The support system is to be capable of maintaining all membrane structures at least 2.1 m above the floor, seating area or surface water, whichever is highest, to permit upright egress travel by the occupants, as well as to aid occupants who may be unable to egress. Where the membrane structure is used as a roof on a Type I or II building, the support system must be capable of maintaining the membrane structure at least 6.1 m above the floor or seating area so that the risk of contribution of the roof structure to a fire is minimized.

## SECTION 3103 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES

3103.1 General. The provisions of Sections 3103.1 through 3103.4 shall apply to structures erected for a period of less than 180 days. Special event structures, tents, umbrella structures and other membrane structures erected for a period of less than 180 days shall also comply with SBC 801. Those erected for a longer period of time shall comply with applicable sections of this code.

The purpose of Section 3103 is to provide public safety requirements in relation to fire, storm, collapse and crowd behavior in temporary structures. "Temporary use" is defined as a period of less than 180 days. Section 1029 of the code and ICC 300 are applicable to the means of egress and the use of bleachers, grandstands and folding or telescopic seating within the temporary structure. Temporary structures may also include temporary wiring and other fire hazards, which are different from those expected in permanent structures. These items are to be identified in the construction documents.

Any structure that is erected for a period of 180 days or more must comply with other sections of the code applicable to permanent structures. It should be noted that “temporary” refers to the structure being erected, not the use of the structure; therefore, if a structure is erected for 365 days a year but is used on a seasonal basis for less than 180 days, this section does not apply. Such structures are considered permanent. It should also be noted that membrane structures, even those erected for less than 180 days, are subject to standards applicable to permanent buildings where they are attached to such buildings (see Section 3102.1).

A temporary structure can be placed on a permanent foundation without being considered as a permanent structure.

Section 107 addresses permitting of such structures. In particular it does give some leeway to the building official to allow extensions of the 180-day criteria.

3103.1.1 Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this code as necessary to ensure public health, safety and general welfare.

===== Page 1944 =====
This section prescribes those categories of the code that must be complied with, despite the fact that the structure will be removed or the use discontinued. These criteria are essential for measuring the safety of any structure or use, temporary or permanent; therefore, the application of these criteria to a temporary structure cannot be waived.

“Structural strength” refers to the ability of the temporary structure to resist anticipated live, environmental and dead loads (see Chapter 16). It also applies to anticipated live and dead loads imposed by a temporary use in an existing structure.

“Fire safety” provisions are those required by Chapter 7, 8 and 9, invoked by virtue of the structure’s size, use or location on the property. “Means of egress” refers to full compliance with Chapter 10.

“Accessibility” refers to full compliance with Chapter 11 for making buildings accessible to physically disabled persons, a requirement that is repeated in Section 1103.1.

“Light, ventilation and sanitary” requirements are those imposed by Chapter 12 of the code or applicable sections of SBC 701 or SBC 501. If temporary structures are permitted in flood hazard areas established by Section 1612, a certain level of conformance is appropriate in order to minimize the likelihood of increasing flood heights or flood damage. Communities that participate in the NFIP must take the following measures into consideration:

1 Anchoring should be required to prevent flotation and movement during conditions of the base flood.

2 In A Zones, walled and roofed structures with floors below the elevation required by Section 1612 should have flood openings to minimize hydrostatic loads (see ASCE 24).

3 Portions of structures that are below the elevation required by Section 1612 must be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials.

4 If the structures have utility service or contain equipment, those elements should be elevated above the DFE.

5 Placement in floodways and flood hazard areas subject to high-velocity wave action (V Zones) should be avoided.

3103.1.2 Permit required. Temporary structures that cover an area greater than 11 m², including connecting areas or spaces with a common means of egress or entrance that are used or intended to be used for the gathering together of 10 or more persons, shall not be erected, operated or maintained for any purpose without obtaining a permit from the building official.
Permits are required for temporary structures that are greater than 11 m² and are used for the gathering of 10 or more people. This provides notice to the building department for larger temporary structures that pose a higher fire and life safety risk related to their size and presence of occupants as well as relief to the smaller temporary structures that pose a low risk.

3103.2 Construction documents. A permit application and construction documents shall be submitted for each installation of a temporary structure. The construction documents shall include a site plan indicating the location of the temporary structure and information delineating the means of egress and the occupant load.

Before the installation of any temporary structure, a permit application and construction documents are required to be submitted.

Construction documents, as defined in Chapter 2, include written, graphic and pictorial documents. At minimum, these documents are to clearly provide pertinent information about the project, including the location, seating capacity, construction and all mechanical and electrical equipment. The code references means of egress and occupant load as items of particular interest for temporary structures because such structures are commonly tents used for special gatherings such as weddings or parties, and therefore the occupant load and clear path of egress are of particular concern. However, it should be noted that these provisions are not intended to remove the need for submittals that are necessary for all new construction, including structural details, calculations, soil tests and any other construction documents that are pertinent. These documents would need to be signed and sealed by a registered design professional as required for new construction.

3103.3 Location. Temporary structures shall be located in accordance with the requirements of Table 705.5 based on the fire-resistance rating of the exterior walls for the proposed type of construction.

With respect to exposure hazards, temporary structures are no different from permanent structures. Therefore, the fire-resistance rating of the temporary structure's exterior walls will depend on the occupancy and the fire separation distance.

3103.4 Means of egress. Temporary structures shall conform to the means of egress requirements of Chapter 10 and shall have an exit access travel distance of 30 m or less.

The means of egress in temporary structures is to comply with the requirements of Chapter 10, except the maximum exit access travel

===== Page 1945 =====
distance is limited to 30 m. The reduced travel distance applies to all temporary uses and is based on concerns associated with the nature of temporary structure construction, which may accelerate fire spread or rapidly decrease the stability of the structure during a fire.

## SECTION 3104 PEDESTRIAN
WALKWAYS AND TUNNELS

3104.1 General. This section shall apply to connections between buildings such as pedestrian walkways or tunnels, located at, above or below grade level, that are used as a means of travel by persons. The pedestrian walkway shall not contribute to the building area or the number of stories or height of connected buildings.

☑ Pedestrian walkways are normally seen as bridges connecting adjacent buildings (see Commentary Figure 3104.1). This section addresses the practical application of pedestrian walkways and tunnels, including walkways between buildings, grade-level connections between buildings and corridors around the perimeter of one building. The area of the walkway itself is not to be considered a part of any building it serves, nor is it considered to add to the number of stories or height of any building it serves, provided that the walkway and its construction comply with this section. In order to not be considered part of the building or require that buildings be evaluated as a single building, Sections 3104.2 through 3104.10 provide specific design conditions and options that are required to be met. This section does not specifically address whether multiple stories of a building may be connected by multiple pedestrian walkways and tunnels.

3104.1.1 Application. Pedestrian walkways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 3104.2 through 3104.9. Tunnels shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 3104.2 and 3104.10.

This section makes it clear that Sections 3104.2 through 3104.9 apply to pedestrian walkways and only Sections 3104.2 and 3104.10 apply to tunnels. Both pedestrian walkways and tunnels must address whether the buildings are considered separately or as one.

3104.2 Separate structures. Buildings connected by pedestrian walkways or tunnels shall be considered to be separate structures.

Exceptions:

1. Buildings that are on the same lot and considered as portions of a single building in accordance with Section 503.1.2.

2. For purposes of calculating the number of Type B units required by Chapter 11, structurally connected buildings and buildings with multiple wings shall be considered to be one structure.

This section clarifies that buildings are considered separate even if connected by a pedestrian walkway. The exceptions go on to state when and under what conditions such buildings are to be considered a single building.

Exception 1 allows multiple separate buildings on the same lot that meet the requirements of Section 503.1.2 to be considered as one building. Exception 1 also applies to a connected building that may be of unlimited area as addressed in Section 507.

Exception 2 establishes that, for purposes of evaluation of a building complex for the required number of Type B dwelling units, buildings connected by pedestrian walkways must be evaluated as a single building. This provision was incorporated to coordinate with the Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines.

3104.3 Construction. The pedestrian walkway shall be of noncombustible construction.

Exceptions:

1. Combustible construction shall be permitted where connected buildings are of combustible construction.

2. Fire-retardant-treated wood, in accordance with Section 603.1, Item 1.3, shall be permitted for the roof construction of the pedestrian walkway where connected buildings are not less than Type I or II construction.

The walkway must be of noncombustible construction, unless all of the buildings it connects are of combustible construction. It is intended that the construction materials of the walkway be consistent with the type of construction classification of the buildings connected by the walkway. Also note that this section does not require structural members of the walkway to have a fire-resistance rating, even if the connected buildings are of a protected construction type. Exception 2 simply allows fire-retardant treated wood (FRTW) where it is already allowed for Type I or II construction, because this section does not depend on Table 601 for determination of the construction requirements for pedestrian walkways. Note that Exception 1 would allow the use of FRTW in all cases, since combustible construction is allowed.

3104.4 Contents. Only materials and decorations approved by the building official shall be located in the pedestrian walkway.

This restriction on the use of the floor area is similar to the restriction on the use of the floor

===== Page 1946 =====
of an atrium, except there is no relaxation of requirements if an automatic sprinkler system is installed. The limitations on materials that the building official makes will likely be related to combustibility and also affects the width of the means of egress.

3104.5 Connections of pedestrian walkways to buildings. The connection of a pedestrian walkway to a building shall comply with Section 3104.5.1, 3104.5.2, 3104.5.3 or 3104.5.4.

Exception: Buildings that are on the same lot and considered as portions of a single building in accordance with Section 503.1.2.

There are essentially four compliance methods for pedestrian walkways that connect buildings. These methods of compliance are not necessary where the buildings are simply considered as one building. In this case, issues such as fire separations and other considerations will no longer be relevant and will be worked into the overall building design.

3104.5.1 Fire barriers. Pedestrian walkways shall be separated from the interior of the building by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 and Sections 3104.5.1.1 through 3104.5.1.3.

This section requires that where the pedestrian walkway enters the building, the wall on the interior of the pedestrian walkway be a 2-hour fire barrier. The exterior walls of buildings connected to a pedestrian walkway are addressed by Section 3104.5.1.1 (see Commentary Figure 3104.5.1).

3104.5.1.1 Exterior walls. Exterior walls of buildings connected to pedestrian walkways shall be 2-hour fire-resistance rated. This protection shall extend not less than 3 m in every direction surrounding the perimeter of the pedestrian walkway.

This section provides the ratings required on exterior walls of buildings where pedestrian walkways are located. In this case, as it is an exterior wall, it could not be a fire barrier. This requires a 3 m surround of the perimeter of the pedestrian walkway. If the wall of the connected building would not normally extend 3 m above the walkway roof, there is no requirement in this section to extend it (see Commentary Figure 3104.5.1).

3104.5.1.2 Openings in exterior walls of connected buildings. Openings in exterior walls required to be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Section 3104.5.1.1 shall be equipped with opening protectives providing a not less than 3/4-hour fire protection rating in accordance with Section 716.
This section is simply noting what is required for protection of the openings found in the 3000-mm surround required to be constructed of 2-hour fire-resistance-rated construction. A minimum 3/4-hour opening protective is required (see Commentary Figure 3104.5.1).

3104.5.1.3 Supporting construction. The fire barrier shall be supported by construction as required by Section 707.5.1.

This section clarifies that Section 707.5 requires that the 2-hour fire barrier be supported by construction having, as a minimum, the same fire-resistance rating.

3104.5.2 Alternative separation. The wall separating the pedestrian walkway and the building shall comply with Section 3104.5.2.1 or 3104.5.2.2 where:

1 The distance between the connected buildings is more than 3 m.

2 The pedestrian walkway and connected buildings are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and the roof of the walkway is not more than 16.5 m above grade connecting to the fifth, or lower, story above grade plane, of each building.

Exception: Open parking garages need not be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system.

This is one of the options for pedestrian walkways that essentially eliminates the need for fire-resistance-rated construction based on several aspects, including sprinklers, separation and location of the pedestrian walkway in terms of height.

Item 1 addresses the minimum separation that is required to allow this option. Essentially, a distance of greater than 3 m is required. This distance is similar to that required in Section 3104.5.1.1 for surrounding construction.

Item 2 requires both the buildings and the pedestrian walkway to be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system. This item also limits the height of the pedestrian walkway to less than 16.5 m (see Commentary Figure 3104.5.2).

3104.5.2.1 Passage of smoke. The wall shall be capable of resisting the passage of smoke.

Fire-resistance-rated construction is not required. However, the construction of the wall must be such that it can resist the passage of smoke. Similar language is used in Section 509.4.2 for incidental uses.

3104.5.2.2 Glass. The wall shall be constructed of a tempered, wired or laminated glass and doors separating the interior of the building from the pedestrian walkway. The glass shall be protected by an automatic sprinkler system in

===== Page 1947 =====
accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 that, when actuated, shall completely wet the entire surface of interior sides of the wall or glass. Obstructions shall not be installed between the sprinkler heads and the wall or glass. The glass shall be in a gasketed frame and installed in such a manner that the framing system will deflect without breaking (loading) the glass before the sprinkler operates.

This section gives specific details on the design of the wall between the pedestrian walkway and building. Part of this detailing is the protection of the wall with a sprinkler system designed to wet the entire surface of the glass when activated. This involves designing the wall so that prior to sprinkler activation it will not deflect such that it breaks.

3104.5.3 Open sides on walkway. Where the distance between the connected buildings is more than 3 m, the walls at the intersection of the pedestrian walkway and each building need not be fire-resistance rated provided that both sidewalls of the pedestrian walkway are not less than 50 percent open with the open area uniformly distributed to prevent the accumulation of smoke and toxic gases. The roof of the walkway shall be located not more than 12 m above grade plane, and the walkway shall only be permitted to connect to the third or lower story of each building.

Exception: Where the pedestrian walkway is protected with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, the roof of the walkway shall be located not more than 16.5 m above grade plane and the walkway shall only be permitted to connect to the fifth or lower story of each building.

This option focuses on allowing an open design of the pedestrian walkway under certain conditions without requiring the walls of the building connecting the pedestrian walkway to provide fire-resistance-rated construction. The openings allow the smoke to dissipate outside the building, thus reducing the risk to building occupants. Note that the openings must be 50 percent or greater of the pedestrian walkway walls on both sides. As with Section 3104.5.2, the distance between buildings must be greater than 3 m [see Commentary Figure 3104.5.3(1)].

The exception provides some flexibility in allowing the pedestrian walkway to be as high as that allowed by Section 3104.5.2, but the walkway must be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system. Note that Section 3104.5.2 requires the connected buildings and the walkway to be equipped throughout with an
automatic sprinkler system [see Commentary Figure 3104.5.3(2)].
3104.5.4 Exterior walls greater than 2 hours. Where exterior walls of connected buildings are required by Section 705 to have a fire-resistance rating greater than 2 hours, the walls at the intersection of the pedestrian walkway and each building need not be fire-resistance rated provided:

1 The pedestrian walkway is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1.

2 The roof of the walkway is not located more than 16.5 m above grade plane and the walkway connects to the fifth, or lower, story above grade plane of each building.

This section provides an additional design option for pedestrian walkways. More specifically, if the buildings that are connected to the pedestrian walkways are required to have greater than a 2-hour fire-resistance rating, then the walls where the pedestrian walkway and building meet do not require 2-hour separation. This allowance comes with several conditions.

The first condition is that the pedestrian walkway be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system.

The second condition is the same as that for Section 3104.5.2 and the exception to Section 3105.5.3, which restricts the height measured to the roof of the walkway to 16.5 m above grade plane, connecting at not higher than the fifth story (see Commentary Figure 3104.5.4).

3104.6 Public way. Pedestrian walkways over a public way shall comply with Chapter 32.

Pedestrian walkways and tunnels that are over or under public ways and connect buildings must comply with Chapter 32.

3104.7 Egress. Access shall be provided at all times to a pedestrian walkway that serves as a required exit.

Pedestrian walkways may be used to provide a portion of the means of egress for one or both of the buildings at either end of the walkway. If the walkway is at grade, it may be that the door from the building is an exterior exit door and the walkway (if just a covering but with open walls) can be treated as exit discharge. Elevated pedestrian walkways can be used as an exit from one building to the other. In this case, one end of the walkway must comply with the standards for horizontal exits found in Section 1026. If the two buildings are being treated as one building, the pedestrian walkway might be part of the exit access portion of the means of egress. As such, its length must be included in determining travel distance for areas served by

===== Page 1948 =====
the walkway. Where a walkway is included in the means of egress, must be to be available at all times the building is occupied. It cannot be locked off if one building is closed and the other still open. Finally, any doors included in the pedestrian walkway must meet the appropriate requirements of Section 1010, including the direction of swing and the use of appropriate hardware that will allow the doors to function as required by the code.

3104.8 Width. The unobstructed width of pedestrian walkways shall be not less than 0.9 m. The total width shall be not greater than 9 mm.

A maximum width has been set to prevent entire floors from being extended to adjacent buildings, and thus from being called walkways. This section is intended to encompass bridge-type structures, not full-floor extensions.

The minimum width is also subject to other code requirements. For example, if the walkway provides a means of egress component, it would be sized in accordance with Section 1005.1.

3104.9 Exit access travel. The length of exit access travel shall be 61 m or less.

Exceptions:

1. Exit access travel distance on a pedestrian walkway equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be 75 m or less.

2. Exit access travel distance on a pedestrian walkway constructed with both sides not less than 50 percent open shall be 90 m or less.

3. Exit access travel distance on a pedestrian walkway constructed with both sides not less than 50 percent open and equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, shall be 120 m or less.

The maximum length of exit access travel distance within the pedestrian walkway has been set as a means of controlling the size of walkways. A 61 m maximum length is consistent with the maximum length of exit access travel distance allowed in non-sprinklered buildings for most occupancy classifications (see Table 1017.2 - Exit Access Travel Distance). This section gives three means by which the exit access travel distance within the pedestrian walkway can be increased. Exception 1 allows the exit access travel distance to be increased to 75 m if the walkway is equipped with an automatic sprinkler system. This increase in travel distance correlates with that allowed in Table 1017.2. Exception 2 allows the exit access travel distance to be increased to 90 m if both sides of the walkway have openings to the exterior for at least 50 percent of the wall area, with the open area uniformly distributed to prevent the accumulation of smoke and toxic gases. This increase in travel distance correlates to that allowed in Table 1017.2 for an open parking structure (Group S-2). Exception 3 expands on Exception 2 by including the use of an automatic sprinkler system. The exit access travel distance is then increased to 120 m. This increase in travel distance correlates to the allowances in Table 1017.2.

3104.10 Tunneled walkway. Separation between the tunneled walkway and the building to which it is connected shall be not less than 2-hour fire-resistant construction and openings therein shall be protected in accordance with Section 716.

Tunnels present a greater hazard than other walkways. The concern is greater than for enclosed walkways because a tunnel's underground location makes it less accessible to fire-fighting efforts and it relies on a mechanical ventilation system. To prevent the spread of fire, 2-hour fire-resistant construction with  \( 1\frac{1}{2} \) -hour opening protectives are required at the tunnel and building interface (see Commentary Figure 3104.10).

## SECTION 3105 AWNINGS
CANOPIES

3105.1 General. Awnings and canopies shall comply with the requirements of Sections 3105.2 through 3105.3 and other applicable sections of this code.

This section addresses the variety of special structures that are defined as canopies and awnings. The intent of this section is that if a canopy or awning is used, it should be soundly designed so as not to present a hazard to its users or the public.

Commentary Figure 3105.1(1) shows a typical canopy supported by posts to the ground and a fabric cover. Commentary Figure 3105.1(3) shows an awning that projects from the facade of the building and has no support directly to the ground.

3105.2 Design and construction. Awnings and canopies shall be designed and constructed to withstand wind or other lateral loads and live loads as required by Chapter 16 with due allowance for shape, open construction and similar features that relieve the pressures or loads. Structural members shall be protected to prevent deterioration. Awnings shall have frames of noncombustible material, fire-retardant treated wood, heavy timber complying with Section 2304.11, or 1-hour construction with

===== Page 1949 =====
combustible or noncombustible covers and shall be either fixed, retractable, folding or collapsible.

* Any of the structures addressed in Section 3105 are subject to wind and live load considerations under the provisions of Chapter 16. When Chapter 16 is applied, care should be taken to consider the shape of the awning or canopy in question with regard to wind effects.

Structural members of an awning or canopy should be of materials that will resist rust or decay. Chapter 23 should be referenced for wood members that are required to comply with the decay-resistance provision. Steel or aluminum structural members are to be protected to resist rust.

3105.3 Awnings and canopy materials. Awnings and canopies shall be provided with an approved covering that complies with one of the following:

1 The fire propagation performance criteria of Test Method 1 or Test Method 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701.

2 Has a flame spread index not greater than 25 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

3 Meets all of the following criteria when tested in accordance with NFPA 286:

3.1 During the 40-kW exposure, flames shall not spread to the ceiling.

3.2 Flashover, as defined in NFPA 286, shall not occur.

3.3 The flame shall not spread to the outer extremity of the sample on any wall or ceiling.

3.4 The peak heat release rate throughout the test shall not exceed 800 kW.

Exception: The fire propagation performance and flame spread index requirements shall not apply to awnings installed on detached one- and two-family dwellings.

This section specifically states the types of materials that are to be used and how an awning or canopy is to be constructed. It limits the coverings to those that are deemed flame resistant when tested in accordance with NFPA 701, those having a flame spread of 25 or less when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL1/23, or those meeting the specific criteria of NFPA 286 that are listed. The purpose of these provisions is to limit the spread of fire on the exterior of the building due to fire from the interior or from an exterior source on the street or public way.

Materials tested in accordance with NFPA 701 must comply with the performance criteria of one of the two identified test methods. The historic “small-scale test” is no longer accepted.

Note that the exception for detached one- and two-family dwellings is applicable only to Items 1 and 2.

## SECTION 3106 MARQUEES

3106.1 General. Marquees shall comply with Sections 3106.2 through 3106.5 and other applicable sections of this code.

If a marquee is used, it should be soundly designed so as not to present a hazard to its users or the public. A “Marquee” is defined in Chapter 2.

Compliance with Chapter 32, “Encroachments into the Public Right-of-way,” is also important for marquees, which by definition project into the public right-of-way. Commentary Figures 3106.1(1) and (2) provide an example of a marquee over a public right-of-way.

3106.2 Thickness. The height or thickness of a marquee measured vertically from its lowest to its highest point shall be not greater than 900 mm where the marquee projects more than two-thirds of the distance from the lot line to the curb line, and shall be not greater than 2.7 m where the marquee is less than two-thirds of the distance from the lot line to the curb line.

The restrictions placed on the size, projection and clearances (see Commentary Figure 3106.2) for marquees are intended to:

1 Prevent interference with the free movement of pedestrians.

2 Prevent interference with trucks and other tall vehicles using the public street.

3 Prevent interference with fire-fighting operations at a building.

4 Prevent interference with utilities.

3106.3 Roof construction. Where the roof of any part thereof is a skylight, the skylight shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 24. Every roof and skylight of a marquee shall be sloped to downspouts that shall conduct any drainage from the marquee in such a manner so as not to spill over the sidewalk.

The purpose of this section is to require proper drainage to prevent buildup on the roof due to a marquee or skylight and also to reduce the nuisance of such drainage to those using the sidewalk.

3106.4 Location prohibited. Every marquee shall be so located as not to interfere with the operation of any exterior standpipe, and such that the marquee does not obstruct the clear passage of stairways or exit discharge from the building or the installation or maintenance of street lighting.

A marquee is an acceptable building feature, but it must not interfere with or obstruct fire

===== Page 1950 =====
protection features and egress. In addition, a marquee must also be placed such that street lights can be maintained.

3106.5 Construction. A marquee shall be supported entirely from the building and constructed of noncombustible materials. Marquees shall be designed as required in Chapter 16. Structural members shall be protected to prevent deterioration.

Damage to both life and property can occur from improperly constructed marquees. Proper design of a marquee involves a structural analysis by qualified persons. Wind and seismic loads must be considered in the design process, as outlined in Chapter 16. Additionally, all material must be noncombustible regardless of the construction type of the building supporting the marquee.

## SECTION 3107 SIGNS

3107.1 General. Signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with this code.

The design of signs is to be in accordance with the code. If the design is inadequate, no amount of expert construction, repair or maintenance will result in a safe sign. The primary requirements for such signs will be related to structural stability as addressed in Chapter 16. Signs projecting over the public right-of-way will also be subject to the requirements of Chapter 32.

Signs within a covered mall building are specifically addressed by Section 402.6.4. Note that Appendix H, when adopted by a jurisdiction, provides more specific requirements related to signs.

## SECTION 3108 TELECOMMUNICATION AND BROADCAST TOWERS

3108.1 General. Towers shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of TIA-222. Towers shall be designed for seismic loads; exceptions related to seismic design listed in Section 2.7.3 of TIA-222 shall not apply. In Section 2.6.6.2 of TIA 222, the horizontal extent of Topographic Category 2, escarpments, shall be 16 times the height of the escarpment.

Exception: Single free-standing poles used to support antennas not greater than 23 m, measured from the top of the pole to grade, shall not be required to be noncombustible.

Telecommunication and broadcast towers, which include media such as radio, television and cell phones, are special structures in that they are not normally occupied and are open structures containing little, if any, fuel load. This section references TIA-222, which provides the necessary structural requirements for such telecommunication and broadcast towers. The seismic design exceptions given in TIA-222, Section 2.7.3, do not apply because these exceptions bring TIA 222-G below the minimum standard of care for design established by the code and SBC 301.

Chapter 15 gives specific requirements for design of communications towers. No exemptions are provided. TIA-222 is not listed as a referenced standard within the Saudi Codes for seismic design, so seismic design requirements must be governed by SBC 301. TIA 222-G, because of exemptions to seismic design requirements, does not meet the minimum standard of care for design established by the code and SBC 301.

The exception to this section will allow combustible poles used to support antennas not greater than 23 m. Such poles are often used for the support of lightweight electrical equipment such as cell phone antennas and have had many years of good performance.

3108.2 Location and access. Towers shall be located such that guy wires and other accessories shall not cross or encroach on any street or other public space, or over above-ground electric utility lines, or encroach on any privately owned property without the written consent of the owner of the encroached-upon property, space or above ground electric utility lines. Towers shall be equipped with climbing and working facilities in compliance with TIA-222. Access to the tower sites shall be limited as required by applicable OSHA and EPA regulations.

Access must be provided to the tower so that its condition can be surveyed. The features required to access such towers are located in TIA-222. Occupational Safety & Health Administration (OSHA) are the regulatory bodies that limit who may access such towers and how.

Guy wires are to be arranged so as not to present a hazard to the public, and, therefore, they shall not cross or encroach a street, public space or electric power line. This is because of both the damage that could occur if a guy wire were suddenly released and the need to prohibit the wire from becoming an obstruction. Guy wires are not to encroach on any other property without previous written consent by the owner of the affected property.

## SECTION 3109 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS

3109.1 General. The design and construction of swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall comply with SBC 1401

===== Page 1951 =====
This section simply refers to the code that addresses swimming pools and all related enclosures and safety devices. The reference is more comprehensive than what was provided in the code through 2012.

## SECTION 3110 AUTOMATIC VEHICULAR GATES

3110.1 General. Automatic vehicular gates shall comply with the requirements of Sections 3110.2 through 3110.3 and other applicable sections of this code.

These provisions are aimed at preventing hazards that could result from improper operation of vehicular gates. Protection is needed to prevent entrapment of individuals between an automatic gate and a stationary object or surface. Gates intended for automation require specific design construction and installation including entrapment protection to minimize or eliminate certain excessive gate gaps, openings and protrusions. As defined, the gates regulated by this section are not those used by pedestrians but instead are intended only for vehicles.

3110.2 Vehicular gates intended for automation. Vehicular gates intended for automation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F2200.

This section cites the design standard to which such gates must be designed and installed. The standard is fairly specific to this application for automated vehicular gates and has been harmonized with the applicable provisions of UL 325 as referenced in Section 3110.3.

3110.3 Vehicular gate openers. Vehicular gate openers, where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325.

This section cites the appropriate standards for vehicular gate openers. The standard is UL 325, which is an ANSI-recognized safety standard containing provisions governing gate openers.

## SECTION 3111 SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS

3111.1 General. Solar energy systems shall comply with the requirements of this section.

Solar energy systems are increasing in popularity as an energy source. This section consolidates provisions for both solar thermal and solar photovoltaic energy systems. Solar thermal energy systems are water-or air-based systems, while solar photovoltaic energy systems are electrical-based systems.

Section 3111 consolidates and organizes these requirements in an easily used format that allows the user to readily locate all the applicable requirements—fire, electrical, structural, plumbing, and mechanical—related to solar thermal and photovoltaic systems.

3111.1.1 Wind resistance. Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic (PV) panel systems and solar thermal collectors shall be designed in accordance with Section 1609.

This section is simply a reference to the wind provisions. The level of structural requirements will vary based on the design wind speeds where the installation is located.

3111.1.2 Roof live load. Roof structures that provide support for solar energy systems shall be designed in accordance with Section 1607.14.4.

This section addresses live loads for solar systems that are roof mounted. It accomplishes this by reference to Section 1607.14.4, Photovoltaic panel systems. Section 1607.14.4, in turn, references five subsections. In combination, these sections indicate where and how such loads must be considered. Note that the loads imposed by photovoltaic panel systems are dead loads, not live loads. This section does not address dead loads. It is also important to note that, although Section 1607.14.4 specifically indicates that it is applicable to photovoltaic panel systems, this section references it for application to both solar thermal and photovoltaic energy systems.

3111.2 Solar thermal systems. Solar thermal systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with this section, SBC 701, SBC 501 and SBC 801. Where light-transmitting plastic covers are used, solar thermal collectors shall be designed in accordance with Section 2606.12.

See the commentary to Section 3111.1.

3111.2.1 Equipment. Solar thermal systems and components shall be listed and labeled in accordance with ICC 900/SRCC 300 and ICC 901/SRCC 100.

Solar thermal panels and modules must be listed and labeled by an approved agency to show that they comply with the applicable national standards, ICC 900/SRCC 300 and ICC 901/SRCC 100. The label is the primary, if not the only, assurance to the installer, the inspector and the end user that a similar appliance has been tested and evaluated by an approved agency and performed safely and efficiently where installed and operated in accordance with its listing. See Chapter 2 for definitions of "Listed" and "Labeled."

3111.3 Photovoltaic solar energy systems. Photovoltaic solar energy systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with this section, SBC 801, NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401) and the manufacturer's installation instructions.

===== Page 1952 =====
The ever-increasing demand for alternative power sources brings with it new hazards to confront emergency responders. Among the most popular of these alternative energy sources are solar photovoltaic (PV) power systems.

Photovoltaic arrays, which cannot be shut down and retain electrical charges, pose unique hazards to fire fighters operating on roofs with arrays or nearby circuits. As such, this section references SBC 801, which provides general requirements to allow for increased safety of fire fighters working near the arrays, as well as NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401). Note that SBC 1101/1102 also addresses these concerns in Section 324 for one- and two-family dwellings.

PV systems are designed to convert light energy into direct current (DC) electricity. They have no moving parts and do not contain fluids. The light-to-electricity conversion begins at the PV cell, which is commonly a semiconductor device that generates electricity when exposed to light. To be effective, PV cells are assembled into PV modules, which are then assembled into PV panels. The panels are assembled onto a frame or a flexible substrate, which then can be affixed to the roof of buildings to create a PV array. The PV arrays and its modules are wired together and generally operate as a series electrical circuit. PV arrays are required by NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401) to have a fuse or other means of branch-circuit protection to prevent them from being overloaded. While not required, a PV array is commonly equipped with a blocking diode. A blocking diode is analogous to a check valve in a piping system because it limits the direction the electrons can travel. The blocking diode prevents electrical current from one power supply from finding entry into another. In PV systems, the blocking diode protects each individual PV panel if other panels fail and prevents the withdrawal of electricity from the system during the night-time.

The greatest danger facing emergency responders operating in proximity to photovoltaic solar energy collection systems is the lack of knowledge needed to operate safely around these systems. Some of the potential hazards associated with PV systems are tripping hazards and/or falls for fire fighters operating on the roof and the potential for earlier roof collapse due to the added dead load and electric shock.

3111.3.1 Equipment. Photovoltaic panels and modules shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1703 or with both UL 61730-1 and UL 61730-2. Inverters shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1741. Systems connected to the utility grid shall use inverters listed for utility interaction.

Photovoltaic panels and modules must be listed and labeled by an approved agency to show that they comply with applicable national standards. The label is the primary, if not the only, assurance to the installer, the inspector and the end user that a similar appliance has been tested and evaluated by an approved agency and performed safely and efficiently when installed and operated in accordance with its listing. Photovoltaic panels and modules must be listed and labeled to either UL 1703 or UL 61730-1 and UL 61730-2. These referenced standards address flat plate photovoltaic modules and panels 1,500 volts or less. Note that UL 61730-1 deals with construction whereas UL 61730-2 addresses testing. Similarly, inverters must be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1741. Where a solar photovoltaic system is connected to a utility grid, the inverters must be listed for such use.

See Chapter 2 for definitions of “Listed” and “Labeled.”

3111.3.2 Fire classification. Rooftop-mounted photovoltaic (PV) panel systems shall have a fire classification in accordance with Section 1505.9. Building-integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) systems installed as roof coverings shall have a fire classification in accordance with Section 1505.8.

This section references Sections 1505.8 and 1505.9. Section 1505.8 requires that BIPV are listed and labeled as other roof coverings, which means compliance with ASTM E108 or UL 790. Section 1505.9 requires photovoltaic panels be tested in accordance with UL 2703. Fire classification of such panels must comply with Table 1505.1. Essentially, such products and systems need to be treated, in terms of fire classification, the same as other roofing materials.

3111.3.3 Building-integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) systems. BIPV systems installed as roof coverings shall be designed and installed in accordance with Section 1507.

BIPV products are defined in Chapter 2 as building products that are part of the building envelope and incorporate photovoltaic modules. Building-integrated photovoltaic roof panels (BIPV roof panels) are defined in Chapter 2 as components of the building envelope that also serve as photovoltaic panels. In addition to complying with Section 3111.3, building integrated photovoltaic systems must be designed and installed in accordance with Section 1507. Note that section 1507.16 has provisions specific to photovoltaic shingles and Section 1507.17 has

===== Page 1953 =====
provisions specific to BIPV roof panels. However, there are provisions elsewhere in Section 1507 that apply to photovoltaic products as well as other types of roof coverings.

3111.3.4 Access and pathways. Roof access, pathways and spacing requirements shall be provided in accordance with Section 1205 of SBC 801.

This section references Section 605.11 of SBC 801, which, along with its subsections, requires that access and paths be provided so that fire fighters can perform the important task of manual ventilation by cutting one or more holes in a building roof.

3111.3.5 Ground-mounted photovoltaic systems. Ground-mounted photovoltaic systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Chapter 16 and SBC 801.

Photovoltaic systems that are mounted on the ground must meet the structural design provisions of Chapter 16 and the provisions of Section 1205.5 in SBC 801. The main focus of the fire code provisions is the control of vegetation around such installations.

3111.3.5.1 Fire separation distances. Ground mounted photovoltaic systems shall be subject to the fire separation distance requirements determined by the law.

The code does not contain specific requirements for ground-mounted photovoltaic systems based on fire separation distance. Instead, the code defaults to the law for guidance based on local conditions, regulations and ordinances. Essentially, this section provides the authority to the jurisdiction to enforce necessary separations.

## SECTION 3112 GREENHOUSES

3112.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to greenhouses that are designed and used for the cultivation, maintenance, or protection of plants.

This section assists designers, other code users and building officials in more consistently applying the requirements for greenhouses. As greenhouse food production and scientific research becomes increasingly vital and sophisticated, this section promotes more consistent enforcement of code text, and facilitates the introduction of new technology related to greenhouses in the future.

The word “greenhouse” is used throughout the code, and important requirements for greenhouses are found in numerous locations in the code. These requirements are often formatted as exceptions in sections that are otherwise unrelated to greenhouses and could be easily overlooked by designers and
enforcers. The purpose of Section 3112 is to locate the most relevant code requirements for greenhouses in a single location.

Other SBC 201 sections with greenhouse requirements are as follows:

• Chapter 3 Occupancy classifications.

• Section 303.4 : Assembly Group A-3

• Section 309.1 : Mercantile Group M

• Section 312: Use Group U

• Section 506: Group U Allowable area

• Section 1103.2.4 : Accessibility exception for Group U

• Table 1604.3: Deflection limits

• Section 1607.14.2.1 : Ordinary roofs, awnings and canopies

• Section 1609.2 : Structural design and protection of openings.

• Section 2405.3, Exception 3, screening

• Section 2606.11 : Greenhouses and light transmitting plastics.

• Section 2607.4, Exception 3, area limitation and separation

• Section 2609.4, Exception 3, area limitations

• Appendix C: Group U agricultural buildings

• Appendix D: Section D105, exceptions to restrictions in fire district.

• Appendix G: Section G114, Utility and miscellaneous Group U.

Note that there are also numerous other Group U requirements that could apply to greenhouses.

3112.2 Accessibility. Greenhouses shall be accessible in accordance with Chapter 11.

While Section 1103.2.4 generally exempts greenhouses from the requirements of Chapter 11, there are cases where Chapter 11 may still be applicable. Greenhouses open to the general public must be provided with accessibility like any other facility. In addition, access to paved work areas is required. See the commentary to Section 1103.2.4.

3112.3 Structural design. Greenhouses shall comply with the structural design requirements for greenhouses in Chapter 16.

As noted in the commentary to Section 3112.1, there are a number of specific allowances or requirements for greenhouses. Generally, such structures must comply with Chapter 16 unless an exception is provided. See the commentary to Section 3112.1 for specific section references.

3112.4 Glass and glazing. Glass and glazing used in greenhouses shall comply with Section 2405.

===== Page 1954 =====
Section 2405.3, Exception 3, as noted in the commentary to Section 3112.1, addresses greenhouses. Essentially, it is an exception to the use of screening for retention of broken glass. See the commentary to Section 2405.3 for more discussion.

3112.5 Light-transmitting plastics. Light-transmitting plastics shall be permitted in lieu of plain glass in greenhouses and shall comply with Section 2606.

Light-transmitting plastic is common in greenhouses. Such materials are regulated within Section 2606. Section 2606 essentially sets the baseline requirements while Sections 2607, 2608 and 2609 are applicable depending on how the greenhouse is constructed. As noted in the commentary to Section 3112.1, there are several allowances specific to greenhouses within the light-transmitting plastic requirements.

3112.6 Membrane structures. Greenhouses that are membrane structures shall comply with Section 3102.

In some cases, greenhouses are membrane structures. Where such a construction is chosen compliance with Section 3102 is required.

3112.6.1 Plastic film. Plastic films used in greenhouses shall comply with Section 3102.3.

Section 3102.3 contains the combustibility criteria for membrane structures. Generally, if combustible the greenhouse would need to meet the requirements of NFPA 701. There are exceptions for nonpublic greenhouses where plastic is less than 9 m above the floor or where the plastic is less than 20 mil in thickness. See the commentary to Sections 3102.3 and 3102.3.1.

## SECTION 3113 RELOCATABLE BUILDINGS

3113.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to relocatable buildings. Relocatable buildings manufactured after the effective date of this code shall comply with the applicable provisions of this code.

Exception: This section shall not apply to manufactured housing used as dwellings.

This section provides a clear and consistent path for enforcement professionals, and for compliance by owners of relocatable buildings who wish to reuse or repurpose their existing buildings. It applies to new relocatable buildings, including site built relocatable buildings. It does not apply to manufactured housing used as dwellings. Relocatable buildings are defined in Chapter 2.
Unlike site-built buildings, which are typically intended to remain on their original site for the life of the building, relocatable modular buildings are designed and intended for relocation, reuse and/or repurposing. Many states have statutes that govern the building and relocating of relocatable modular buildings. For those that do not have state-mandated requirements, much confusion and inconsistency exists about the requirements for relocatable modular buildings, including relocatable modular existing buildings.

The Modular Building Institute (MBI) (www.modular.org) estimated that there were over 600,000 code compliant relocatable buildings in use in North America in 2016. While it is impossible to determine the exact amount owned by the public at large, MBI estimates that public school districts across North America collectively own and operate about 180,000 relocatable classrooms with the industry owning and leasing an additional 120,000. Additionally, the industry owns and leases approximately 280,000 relocatable buildings for various other business occupancies, including construction site offices and temporary sales offices.

3113.1.1 Compliance. A newly constructed relocatable building shall comply with the requirements of this code for new construction. An existing relocatable building that is undergoing alteration, addition, change of occupancy or relocation shall comply with Chapter 14 of SBC 901.

New relocatable buildings must comply with this code. For existing relocatable buildings, the requirements of SBC 901 apply and this code does not apply.

3113.2 Supplemental information. Supplemental information specific to a relocatable building shall be submitted to the building official. It shall, as a minimum, include the following in addition to the information required by Section 105:

1 Manufacturer's name and address.

2 Date of manufacture.

3 Serial number of module.

4 Manufacturer's design drawings.

5 Type of construction in accordance with Section 602.

6 Design loads including roof live load, roof floor live load, wind load and seismic site class, use group and design category.

7 Additional building planning and structural design data.

8 Site-built structure or appurtenance attached to the relocatable building.

The information required in Sections 3113.2 and 3113.3 provide information to building

===== Page 1955 =====
officials that is useful when determining whether a relocated modular building is compliant with the code’s requirements in a new location or jurisdiction.

3113.3 Manufacturer's data plate. Each relocatable module shall have a data plate that is permanently attached on or adjacent to the electrical panel, and shall include the following information:

1 Occupancy group.

2 Manufacturer's name and address.

3 Date of manufacture.

4 Serial number of module.

5 Design roof live load, design floor live load, wind and seismic design.

6 Approved quality assurance agency or approved inspection agency.

7 Codes and standards of construction.

8 Envelope thermal resistance values.

9 Electrical service size.

10 Fuel-burning equipment and size.

11 Special limitations if any.

The information required in Sections 3113.2 and 3113.3 provide information to building officials that is useful when determining whether a relocated modular building is compliant with the code’s requirements in a new location or jurisdiction.

3113.4 Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized to accept reports of inspections conducted by approved inspection agencies during off-site construction of the relocatable building, and to satisfy the applicable requirements of Sections 110.3 through 110.3.12.1.

Generally, this section allows approved agencies to determine whether relocatable buildings constructed off-site meet the requirements of this section. The inspections must comply with requirements of Sections 110.3 through 110.3.12.1.

## SECTION 3114 PUBLIC USE RESTROOM BUILDINGS IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS

Not applicable to KSA

## SECTION 3115 INTERMODAL SHIPPING CONTAINERS

3115.1 General. The provisions of Section 3115 and other applicable sections of this code shall apply to intermodal shipping containers that are repurposed for use as buildings or structures, or as a part of buildings or structures.

Exceptions:

1. Intermodal shipping containers previously approved as existing relocatable buildings complying with Chapter 14 of SBC 901.
2. Stationary storage battery arrays located in intermodal shipping containers complying with Chapter 12 of SBC 801.

3. Intermodal shipping containers that are listed as equipment complying with the standard for equipment, such as air chillers, engine generators, modular data centers, and other similar equipment.

4. Intermodal shipping containers housing or supporting experimental equipment are exempt from the requirements of Section 3115, provided that they comply with all of the following:

4.1. Such units shall be single stand-alone units supported at grade level and used only for occupancies as specified under Risk Category I in Table 1604.5.

4.2. Such units are located a minimum of 2400 mm from adjacent structures and are not connected to a fuel gas system or fuel gas utility.

4.3. In hurricane-prone regions and flood hazard areas, such units are designed in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 16.

The intent of these provisions is to provide specific requirements to consistently and safely regulate intermodal shipping containers. The provisions were added to this code based on requests by building officials in the US to develop a set of consistent code provisions which cover the minimum safety requirements but which do not duplicate existing code provisions. See Commentary Figure 3115.1(1), Figure 3115.1(2) and Figure 3115.1(3) for examples of an intermodal shipping container intended to be regulated by these provisions.

Prior to these provisions several jurisdictions created their own regulations or ordinances, or administered additional requirements beyond the code, in an effort to ensure a safe structure. These provisions cover several topics:

- Exceptions to differentiate the intermodal shipping container from other code sections that could be interpreted as applying to intermodal shipping containers under other applications (e.g. temporary storage, housing special equipment or experimental research, relocatable buildings, energy storage facilities and listed equipment).

- Verification of a container’s construction, condition, and structural integrity to assist the structural engineer in the evaluation for building construction.

- References to other sections of this code concerning foundations, decay, termite

===== Page 1956 =====
control, crawl space ventilation, roof assemblies, interior finishes and joints/intersections.

- Introduction of structural provisions that are unique to intermodal shipping containers, do not duplicate the existing structural requirements and provide a reference to appropriate ISO standards on the topic.

Intermodal shipping containers are defined in Chapter 2. These provisions further clarify the difference between intermodal shipping containers in accordance with Section 3115 as compared to other types of portable storage containers. In those cases, the term "intermodal shipping containers" is intentionally not used.

3115.2 Construction documents. The construction documents shall contain information to verify the dimensions and establish the physical properties of the steel components and wood floor components of the intermodal shipping container, in addition to the information required by Sections 107 and 1603.

These provisions require that information be contained in the construction documents that are beyond what is required in the Section 107 "Submittal Documents" and Chapter 16 "Construction Documents" provisions.

3115.3 Intermodal shipping container information. Intermodal shipping containers shall bear an existing data plate containing the following information as required by ISO 6346 and verified by an approved agency. A report of the verification process and findings shall be provided to the building owner.

1 Manufacturer's name or identification number.

2 Date manufactured.

3 Safety approval number.

4 Identification number.

5 Maximum operating gross mass or weight (kg).

6 Allowable stacking load for 1.8G (kg).

7 Transverse racking test force (Newtons).

8 Valid maintenance examination date.

Where approved by the building official, the markings and existing data plate are permitted to be removed from the intermodal shipping containers before they are repurposed for use as buildings or structures or as a part of buildings or structures.

These provisions focus on identifying or verifying the characteristics of the intermodal shipping container prior to it being repurposed. In this case the provisions require a straightforward inspection by an approved agency, and verification of the data plate and the information contained therein which is normally found on intermodal shipping containers. See Commentary Figure 3115.3 for an example data plate.

The approved agency is not specified for two reasons:

1 To allow the building official to handle this aspect recognizing that each jurisdiction's requirements may be different.

2 To avoid indirectly dictating an international agreement used by shipping and container manufacturers worldwide onto jurisdictions.

In this case, the standards are regulated by the International Convention of Safe Containers (CSC), which has policies and procedures for inspecting containers worldwide. These procedures include policies for Approved Continuous Examination Program (ACEP) at the time the container is used in production, and policies for third-party inspection agencies. The list shown in this section is an excerpt from the ISO standard and serves as a reference of items to be verified in order to validate the type of container.

3115.4 Protection against decay and termites. Wood structural floors of intermodal shipping containers shall be protected from decay and termites in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 2304.12.1.1.

Since intermodal shipping containers are built with marine grade plywood flooring. A pointer is provided to the provisions of SBC 201 addressing termite damage.

3115.5 Under-floor ventilation. The space between the bottom of the floor joists and the earth under any intermodal shipping container, except spaces occupied by basements and cellars, shall be provided with ventilation in accordance with Section 1202.4.

Underfloor ventilation is necessary to remove moisture and moderate temperatures to prevent decay and rot of the intermodal shipping container. In some cases, repurposed intermodal shipping container buildings may have a basement or cellar, which would avoid potential moisture issues. The language of this section is consistent with Section 1202.4. See the commentary to Section 1202.4.

3115.6 Roof assemblies. Intermodal shipping container roof assemblies shall comply with the applicable requirements of Chapter 15.

Exception: Single-unit, stand-alone intermodal shipping containers not attached to, or stacked vertically over, other intermodal shipping containers, buildings or structures.

This section is merely a pointer to Chapter 15 for roofing requirements. Unless the intermodal

===== Page 1957 =====
shipping container is a single, stand-alone unit, the roofing requirements of the intermodal shipping container buildings are required to be consistent with all other building types.

3115.7 Joints and voids. Joints and voids that create concealed spaces between connected or stacked intermodal shipping containers at fire-resistance-rated walls, floor or floor/ceiling assemblies and roofs or roof/ceiling assemblies shall be protected by an approved fire-resistant joint system in accordance with Section 715.

This provision is provided to address the interstitial spaces that may be created where multiple intermodal shipping containers are connected or stacked, whereby that concealed space between the containers is intended to be protected to prevent fire and hot gasses from passing between containers.

3115.8 Structural. Intermodal shipping containers that conform to ISO 1496-1 and are repurposed for use as buildings or structures, or as a part of buildings or structures, shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 16 and this section.

This section introduces the necessary structural requirements for shipping containers. The structural provisions are divided into multiple categories, as follows:
1 The general characteristics for all containers.

2 Engineered structural design.
3 Simplified method for single-unit, stand-alone intermodal shipping containers.

3115.8.1 Foundations. Intermodal shipping containers repurposed for use as a permanent building or structure shall be supported on foundations or other supporting structures designed and constructed in accordance with Chapter 16 through 23.

Where used as a permanent building or structure, intermodal shipping containers are required to be secured onto a foundation that must comply with the appropriate provisions in Chapters 16 through 23. There are no specific requirements for foundations within Section 3115.

3115.8.1.1 Anchorage. Intermodal shipping containers shall be anchored to foundations or other supporting structures as necessary to provide a continuous load path for all applicable design and environmental loads in accordance with Chapter 16.

This section outlines the two options for securing the repurposed intermodal shipping container: (1) By placing an intermodal shipping container on a foundation, or (2) By integrating the intermodal shipping container within another structure. This provision makes it clear that the load path and anchorage shall be in accordance with the design and environmental loads addressed in Chapter 16.
3115.8.2 Welds. New welds and connections shall be equal to or greater than the original connections.

This section requires that any new welds be designed and installed with welds of greater structural capabilities. This will maintain or provide greater structural stability to the repurposed intermodal shipping container.

3115.8.3 Structural design. The structural design for the intermodal shipping containers repurposed for use as a building or structure, or as part of a building or structure, shall comply with Section 3115.8.4 or 3115.8.5.

This section is merely introducing the two methods available for structural design of intermodal shipping containers used as a building or structure. The first method is a more detailed structural analysis for a structure made up of anything more than a single stand-alone intermodal shipping container and in some cases single shipping containers used in a way that requires a higher level of design review. The second option is a simplified structural method that is applicable only to stand-alone shipping containers under specific conditions.

3115.8.4 Detailed design procedure. A structural analysis meeting the requirements of this section shall be provided to the building official to demonstrate the structural adequacy of the intermodal shipping containers.

Exception: Intermodal shipping containers designed in accordance with Section 3115.8.5.

The detailed analysis engineering approach represents the general engineering practice allowed for all other types of building construction. For this section, the engineer of record is allowed to practice as they normally would for any other building type. Note that much of this section requires submission through the alternative means and methods provisions in order to obtain a permit, as information about intermodal shipping containers is not readily listed in SBC 201 provisions or referenced standards.

3115.8.4.1 Material properties. Structural material properties for existing intermodal shipping container steel components shall be established by material testing where the steel grade and composition cannot be identified by the manufacturer's designation as to manufacture and mill test.

In order to understand the structural performance of the container, the material properties of the steel must be determined. If this information is not provided by the manufacturer's designation, the materials must

===== Page 1958 =====
be tested in order to ascertain the properties of the steel.

3115.8.4.2 Seismic design parameters. The seismic force-resisting system shall be designed and detailed in accordance with one of the following:

1 Where all or portions of the corrugated steel container sides are considered to be the seismic force-resisting system, design and detailing shall be in accordance with SBC 301, Table 12.2-1 requirements for light frame bearing-wall systems with shear panels of all other materials.

2 Where portions of the corrugated steel container sides are retained but are not considered to be the seismic force-resisting system, an independent seismic force-resisting system shall be selected, designed and detailed in accordance with SBC 301, Table 12.2-1.

3 Where portions of the corrugated steel container sides are retained and integrated into a seismic force-resisting system other than as permitted by Item 1, seismic design parameters shall be developed from testing and analysis in accordance with Section 104.11 and SBC 301, Section 12.2.1.1 or 12.2.1.2.

This section lays out how the seismic force-resisting system must be evaluated. This analysis will be based on whether the sides (e.g., corrugated steel panels and/or steel tube frame) of the container are fully retained and are used as part of the seismic force resisting system or only some sides are retained. Where some sides are retained, the analysis must be either based on providing an independent structural system to create the seismic force-resisting system or the remaining container sides constituting part of the system. Each scenario requires its own design path.

## 3115.8.4.3 Allowable shear value.

The allowable shear values for the intermodal shipping container corrugated steel sheet panel side walls and end walls shall be demonstrated by testing and analysis in accordance with Section 104.11. Where penetrations are made in the side walls or end walls designated as part of the lateral force-resisting system, the penetrations shall be substantiated by rational analysis.

The evaluation of shear values for shipping containers is fully a case-by-case situation when using the detailed design method. There are a number of different configurations that can be created with intermodal shipping containers and each situation needs to be treated individually to fully assess the shear values for the overall structure. Penetrations in the side or end walls can decrease the shear values. Such penetrations must be specifically analyzed to see what impact those openings have on the overall shear values.

3115.8.5 Simplified structural design of single-unit containers. Single-unit intermodal shipping containers conforming to the limitations of Section 3115.8.5.1 shall be permitted to be designed in accordance with the simplified structural design provisions of Section 3115.8.5.2.

The concept for the single-container approach is to make the design and construction process simpler for single-unit applications. Example uses might include ticket offices located at a stadium parking lot, drive through retail or other services or a guard station.

The provisions include a strict listing of limitations for use of these provisions. The requirements provide structural design information and pre-established shear wall information that is contained in the ISO 1496-1 standard, which is used to design and construct intermodal shipping containers. The shear wall values were derived from ISO 1496-1 through engineering analysis using a factor of safety of 5. In addition, there are requirements limiting the number and size of openings and service holes within the container, as well as to prevent building owners or designers from embellishing the size to something most engineers would define as an opening. This method is intended to address the simple structure approach and provide available information for use by the structural engineer to supplement their work.

3115.8.5.1 Limitations. The use of Section 3115.8.5 is subject to the following limitations:

1 The intermodal shipping container shall be a single-unit, stand-alone unit supported on a foundation and shall not be in contact with or supporting any other shipping container or other structure.

2 The intermodal shipping container top and bottom rails, corner castings, and columns or any portion thereof shall not be notched, cut, or removed in any manner.

3 The intermodal shipping container shall be erected in a level and horizontal position with the floor located at the bottom.

4 The intermodal shipping container shall be located in Seismic Design Category A, B, C or D.

This section scopes the applicability of the simplified structural design method for standalone single intermodal shipping container structures. The intermodal shipping container can have no connections to other intermodal shipping containers or structures. Additionally, single shipping containers must be located on

===== Page 1959 =====
a foundation, retain the structural integrity of the container by leaving many aspects such as bottom rails and columns as manufactured, and be in an upright position as it was designed to be used. This method cannot be used within Seismic Design Category F. If these limitations cannot be met, then the detail design analysis as specified in Section 3115.8.4 must be used.

3115.8.5.2 Simplified structural design. Where permitted by Section 3115.8.5.1, single-unit, stand-alone intermodal shipping containers shall be designed using the following assumptions for the corrugated steel shear walls:

1 The appropriate detailing requirements contained in Chapters 16 through 23.

2 Response modification coefficient, R = 2.

3 Overstrength factor,  \( \Omega_{0}=2.5 \)

4 Deflection amplification factor,  \( C_{d}=2 \) .

5 Limits on structural height,  \( h_{n} = 2900 \)  mm.

This simply sets out the structural design criteria for single-unit containers that fall within the scope of Section 3115.8.5. Basically, this is a prescriptive design approach not requiring a detailed analysis.

3115.8.5.3 Allowable shear. The allowable shear for the corrugated steel side walls (longitudinal) and end walls (transverse) for wind design and seismic design using the coefficients of Section 3115.8.5.2 shall be in accordance with Table 3115.8.5.3, provided that all of the following conditions are met:

1 The total linear length of all openings in any individual side wall or end wall shall be limited to not more than 50 percent of the length of that side wall or end wall, as shown in Figure 3115.8.5.3(1).

2 Any full-height wall length, or portion thereof, less than 1.2 m shall not be considered as a portion of the lateral force-resisting system, as shown in Figure 3115.8.5.3(2).

3 All side walls or end walls used as part of the lateral force-resisting system shall have an existing or new boundary element on all sides to form a continuous load path, or paths, with adequate strength and stiffness to transfer all forces from the point of application to the final point of resistance, as shown in Figure 3115.8.5.3(3).

4 Where openings are made in container walls, floors or roofs, for doors, windows and other openings:

4.1 The openings shall be framed with steel elements that are designed in accordance with Chapters 16 and 22.
4.2 The cross section and material grade of any new steel element shall be equal to or greater than the steel element removed.

5 A maximum of one penetration not greater than 150 mm in diameter for conduits, pipes, tubes or vents, or not greater than 10350 mm \( ^{2} \)  for electrical boxes, is permitted for each individual 2.4 m length of lateral force-resisting wall. Penetrations located in walls that are not part of the lateral force-resisting system shall not be limited in size or quantity. Existing intermodal shipping container vents shall not be considered a penetration, as shown in Figure 3115.8.5.3(4).

6 End wall doors designated as part of the lateral force-resisting system shall be welded closed.

This section sets out how the allowable shear values are determined. Much of the criteria required by this section is addressed also by the referenced figures within the code text.

Part of this process limits size of openings, which openings affect use in providing shear strength such as full height doors, requirements for framing of openings and maximum size of penetrations for building services and systems such as plumbing, ventilation and electrical. The values for types of containers based on meeting the criteria in Section 3115.8.5.3 are found in Table 3115.8.5.3. As you will see, the values for shear in the side walls vary as the container becomes more compact but the end wall value is consistent. The more compact a container the higher the ability to resist lateral loads.

Figure 3115.8.5.3(1) provides the maximum length of openings inside walls or end walls to limit the reduction in shear strength. An intermodal shipping container 12 m in length would be allowed to have 6 m open on that individual side.

Figure 3115.8.5.3(2) is focused on how the openings can be broken up along the side or end of the intermodal shipping container. In other words, anything less than 1.2 m would be considered as an opening and could not be counted as part of the minimum length needed for lateral strength. Continuing with the example of a shipping container that is 12 m in length, in order for the 6 m of unopened side wall to be considered 50 percent of the total wall length, no section could be less than 1.2 m. For example, it could be broken into four 1.5 m sections but could not be broken into sections of 5.1 m and 0.9 m.

Section 3115.8.5.3, Item 3 requires that all boundary elements form continuous load paths.

===== Page 1960 =====
Figure 3115.8.5.3(3) figure sets out where these boundary elements are required to be located.

Item 5 of Section 3115.8.5.3 limits the opening for one penetration for every 2.4 m length of walls providing lateral strength. Figure 3115.8.5.3(4) shows where these limits are applied. It also points out an existing vent that is permitted to remain.

## SECTION 3116 TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEM IN BUILDING

This section covers communication circuits and equipment in buildings

3116.1 Telecommunication circuit The access point junction and pull-box conduit ducts trays pathways electromechanical elements of a telecommunication circuit are recommended to be designed and constructed as per the reference guide (CST-GUIDE-101.3-24).

===== Page 1961 =====
## TABLES AND FIGURES OF CHAPTER 31

TABLE 3115.8.5.3

ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES FOR INTERMODAL SHIPPING CONTAINER CORRUGATED STEEL WALLS FOR WIND OR SEISMIC LOADING

<table><td rowspan="2">CONTAINER DESIGNATIONb<td rowspan="2">CONTAINER DIMENSION length<td rowspan="2">(nominal)<td rowspan="2">CONTAINER DIMENSION height<td rowspan="2">(nominal)<td colspan="2">ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES (kN/m)a,cSide WallEnd Wall1EEE<td rowspan="2">13.5 m2.85 m<td rowspan="2"><td rowspan="2">1.1<td rowspan="2">1EE2.55 m1AAA<td rowspan="4">12 m2.85 m<td rowspan="4"><td rowspan="4">1.25<td rowspan="4">1AA2.55 m1A2.4 m1AX&lt; 2.4 m1BBB<td rowspan="4">9 m2.85 m<td rowspan="4"><td rowspan="4">1.65<td rowspan="4">12.301BB2.55 m1B2.4 m1BX&lt; 2.4 m1CC<td rowspan="3">6 m2.55 m<td rowspan="3"><td rowspan="3">2.45<td rowspan="3">1C2.4 m1CX&lt; 2.4 m1D<td rowspan="2">3 m2.4 m<td rowspan="2"><td rowspan="2">4.9<td rowspan="2">1DX&lt; 2.4 m</table>

a. The allowable strength shear for the side walls and end walls of the intermodal shipping containers are derived from ISO 1496-1 and reduced by a factor of safety of 5.

b. Container designation type is derived from ISO 668.

c. Limitations of Section 3115.8.5.1 shall apply.

NONCOMBUSTIBLE MEMBRANE PERMITTED ON ANY TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION

FLAME-RESISTANT MEMBRANE PERMITTED ON TYPES IIB, III, IV and V

FIGURE 3102.6.1

NONCOMBUSTIBLE AND FLAME-RESISTANT MEMBRANE CONSTRUCTION

===== Page 1962 =====
FIGURE 3104.1
EXAMPLE – PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY

===== Page 1963 =====
FIGURE 3104.5.1
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY – BUILDING INTERFACE

===== Page 1964 =====
FIGURE 3104.5.2
ALTERNATIVE SEPARATION

===== Page 1965 =====
FIGURE 3104.5.3(1)
OPEN SIDES ON PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY (NONSPRINKLERED)

===== Page 1966 =====
FIGURE 3104.5.3(2)
OPEN SIDES ON PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY (SPRINKLERED)

===== Page 1967 =====
FIGURE 3104.5.4
EXTERIOR WALLS GREATER THAN 2 HOURS

===== Page 1968 =====
FIGURE 3104.10
TUNNELED WALKWAY

===== Page 1969 =====
FIGURE 3105.1(1)
EXAMPLE – CANOPY

===== Page 1970 =====
FIGURE 3105.1(3)
EXAMPLE - AWNINGS
(PHOTO COURTESY OF EDIED INDUSTRIES INC.)

===== Page 1971 =====
FIGURE 3106.1(1)
EXAMPLE – MARQUEE

===== Page 1972 =====
FIGURE 3106.1(2)
EXAMPLE – MARQUEE

===== Page 1973 =====
FIGURE 3106.2

PERMISSIBLE PROJECTION, HEIGHT AND CLEARANCES FOR MARQUES

===== Page 1974 =====
FIGURE 3114.1
PUBLIC RESTROOM FLOOD ELEVATION COMPLIANT

FIGURE 3114.2
PUBLIC RESTROOM DESIGNED FOR FLOOD RESISTANCE

===== Page 1975 =====
FIGURE 3115.1(1)

EXAMPLE OF SHIPPING CONTAINER STRUCTURE WITH MULTIPLE SHIPPING CONTAINERS

FIGURE 3115.1(2)

EXAMPLE OF SHIPPING CONTAINER STRUCTURE WITH MULTIPLE SHIPPING CONTAINERS

===== Page 1976 =====
FIGURE 3115.1(3)
EXAMPLE OF SINGLE SHIPPING CONTAINER STRUCTURE

FIGURE 3115.3

EXAMPLE OF SHIPPING CONTAINER STRUCTURE DATAPLATE

===== Page 1977 =====
FIGURE 3115.8.5.3(1)
BRACING UNIT DISTRIBUTION—MAXIMUM LINEAR LENGTH

FIGURE 3115.8.5.3(2)
BRACING UNIT DISTRIBUTION—MINIMUM LINEAR LENGTH

===== Page 1978 =====
FIGURE 3115.8.5.3(3)
BRACING UNIT DISTRIBUTION—BOUNDARY ELEMENTS

FIGURE 3115.8.5.3(4)
BRACING UNIT DISTRIBUTION—PENETRATION LIMITATIONS

===== Page 1979 =====
This page left intentionally blank

