===== Page 1506 =====
# CHAPTER 16—STRUCTURAL DESIGN

## * General Comments

This chapter contains the commentary for the following structural topics: definitions of structural terms, construction document requirements, load combinations, dead loads, live loads, wind loads, soil lateral loads, rain loads, flood loads and earthquake loads. This chapter provides minimum design requirements so that all buildings and structures are proportioned to resist the loads and forces that are likely to be encountered. The loads specified herein have been established through research and service performance of buildings and structures. The application of these loads and adherence to the serviceability criteria will enhance the protection of life and property. The earthquake loads and wind loads in this chapter are based on SBC 301.

## Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe minimum structural loading requirements for use in the design and construction of buildings and structures with the intent to minimize hazard to life and improve the occupancy capability of essential facilities after a design level event or occurrence.

## SECTION 1601 GENERAL.

1601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the structural design of buildings, structures and portions thereof regulated by this code.

While a significant portion of Chapter 16 is dedicated to the determination of minimum design loads, it also includes other important criteria that impact the design of structures, such as the permitted design methodologies, as well as the combinations of design loads used to establish the required minimum strength of structural members. Unless stated otherwise, the criteria found in this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures. See Chapter 34 for application of these requirements to alterations, additions or repairs to existing structures.

## SECTION 1602 NOTATIONS

1602.1 Notations. The following notations are used in this Chapter:

D = Dead load.

E = Combined effect of horizontal and vertical earthquake induced forces as defined in Section 12.4 of SBC 301.

F = Load due to fluids with well-defined pressures and maximum heights.

 \( F_{a}= \)  Flood load in accordance with Chapter 5 of SBC 301.

H = Load due to lateral earth pressures, ground water pressure or pressure of bulk materials.

L = Live load.

 \( L_{r} \)  = Roof live.

R = Rain load.

T = Cumulative effects of self-straining load forces and effects.

 \( V_{asd} \)  = Allowable stress design wind speed, km/hr, where applicable.

V = Basic design wind speeds, km/hr, determined from Figure 1609.3(1) through Figure 1609.3(4) or SBC 301.

W = Load due to wind pressure.

These notations are used to refer to specific nominal loads that are determined in this chapter for use in the load combinations in Section 1605:

D is the nominal dead load determined in Section 1606. Also see the definition of "Dead load."

Earthquake load effect, E, in SBC 301 includes the effects of the horizontal load,  \( E_{h} \) , as well as a vertical component,  \( E_{v} \) .  \( E_{h} \)  is the product of the redundancy factor, p, and  \( Q_{E} \) , the effects of horizontal earthquake forces.  \( E_{v} \)  accounts for vertical acceleration due to earthquake ground motion and is taken as  \( 0.2S_{DS}D \) . Note that its magnitude is not intended to represent a total vertical response, since that is not likely to coincide with the maximum horizontal response. It is essentially a portion of the dead load, D, that is added in "additive" load combinations or subtracted in "counteractive" load combinations. The term  \( S_{DS} \) , design spectral response acceleration at short periods, is explained in the commentary to Section 1613.2.4.

For example, when this expression is used in the alternative allowable stress design load combinations of Section 1605.2 that include earthquake load effects, the resulting combinations are as follows:

(See Equation 16-5)

 \[ D+L+\frac{E}{1.4}=(1+0.143S_{DS})D+L+\frac{\rho Q_{e}}{1.4} \]

See Equation 16-6

===== Page 1507 =====
 \[ 0.9D+\frac{E}{1.4}=(0.9-0.143S_{DS})D+\frac{\rho Q_{e}}{1.4} \]

Earthquake design criteria are provided in Section 1613, which, in turn, references the relevant SBC 301 provisions for computation of the earthquake load effects. While these loads are necessary for establishing the required strength, the computed forces approximate the expected deformations under the design earthquake ground motions and are not applied to a structure in an actual earthquake.

F refers to the nominal load due to fluids having “well-defined pressures and maximum heights.” Unlike most other nominal loads, there is no code section governing the determination of fluid loads. Also note that F includes a vertical component (fluid weight), as well as a horizontal component (lateral pressure).

 \( F_{a} \)  is used to refer to the flood load that is determined under Chapter 5 of SBC 301.

H is used to refer to the nominal load resulting from lateral soil pressure, lateral pressure of ground water or the lateral pressure of bulk materials. Section 1610 specifies minimum requirements for lateral soil loads. Note that there are no specific provisions for the determination of loads resulting from the lateral pressure of bulk materials.

L is the nominal live load determined in accordance with Section 1607 (also see the definition of "Live load").

L_{r} represents nominal roof live loads.

R is the nominal rain load determined in accordance with Section 1611.

T is used to refer to self-straining forces resulting from contraction or expansion caused by temperature change, shrinkage, moisture change or creep, as well as movement caused by differential settlement. A thermal gradient at an exterior wall is an example of a structural element where these self-straining forces can affect the design. Unlike most other nominal loads, there is no code section governing the determination of self-straining forces.

 \( V_{asd} \)  refers to allowable stress design wind speeds that are determined in Section 1609.3.1.

V refers to mapped wind speeds in order to differentiate them from the allowable stress design wind speeds.

W is the strength-level wind load determined in accordance with Section 1609.

## SECTION 1603 CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS

1603.1 General. Construction documents shall show the size, section and relative locations of structural members with floor levels, column centers and offsets fully dimensioned. The design loads and other information pertinent to the structural design required by Sections 1603.1.1 through 1603.1.9 shall be clearly indicated on the construction documents.

The term “construction documents” is defined in Chapter 2. It is commonly used to refer to calculations, drawings and specifications, but it includes other data that is required to indicate compliance with the code as described in Section 107. The purpose of this section is to specifically require the design professional to provide the building official with the appropriate structural details, criteria and design load data for verifying compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Note that additional structural information and specific submittal documents may also be required to be incorporated by Chapter 17 through 23.

Construction documents are required to contain sufficient detail for the building official to perform plan review and field inspection, as well as for construction activity. Dimensions indicated on architectural drawings are not required to be duplicated on structural drawings and vice versa. The design loads, to be indicated by the design professional on the construction documents, are to be consistent with the loads used in the structural calculations. While the loads are not required to be on the construction drawings, they must be included within the construction documents in a manner such that the design loads are clear. It is good practice, however, to include the design loads on the construction drawings, as these are often the only documents retained by the owner and the building official after construction is completed. The building official is to compare the loads on the construction documents with the applicable minimum required loads as specified by this chapter. The inclusion of the load design information is an indication that the structure has been designed for the loads required by the code. It should be emphasized that these requirements for construction documents are applicable regardless of the involvement of a registered design professional.

1603.1.1 Floor live load. The uniformly distributed, concentrated and impact floor live load used in the design shall be indicated for floor areas. Use of live load reduction in accordance with

===== Page 1508 =====
Section 1607.12 shall be indicated for each type of live load used in the design.

This section provides information for the building official to facilitate the plan review process. The floor live loads, which are indicated on the construction documents by the design professional, are required to meet or exceed the loads in Section 1607. Any live load reductions taken are also to be indicated.

1603.1.2 Roof live load. The roof live load used in the design shall be indicated for roof areas (Section 1607.14). Roof live load reduction in accordance with Section 16.7.12.2, if used in the design, shall be indicated.

This section provides information to facilitate the plan review process. The roof live loads, indicated on the construction documents by the design professional, are required to meet or exceed the loads in Section 1607.14.

1603.1.3 Roof snow load data. Inapplicable to KSA.

1603.1.4 Wind design data. The following information related to wind loads shall be shown, regardless of whether wind loads govern the design of the lateral force-resisting system of the structure:

1 Basic design wind speed, V, m/s and allowable stress design wind speed,  \( V_{asd} \) , as determined in accordance with Section 1609.3.1.

2 Risk category.

3 Wind exposure. Applicable wind direction if more than one wind exposure is utilized.

4 Applicable internal pressure coefficient.

5 Design wind pressures and their applicable zones with dimensions to be used for exterior component and cladding materials not specifically designed by the registered design professional responsible for the design of the structure, kN/m \( ^{2} \) .

Providing the wind load design basis on the construction documents facilitates the plan review process. All five of the indicated items are to be on the submitted construction documents. Each of the indicated items is an important parameter in the determination of the wind resistance that is required in the building framework. The building official should verify that the information is on the construction documents during the plan review process.

1603.1.5 Earthquake design data. The following information related to seismic loads shall be shown, regardless of whether seismic loads govern the design of the lateral force-resisting system of the structure:

1 Risk category.

2 Seismic importance factor,  \( I_{e} \)

3 Mapped spectral response acceleration parameters,  \( S_{S} \)  and  \( S_{1} \) .

4 Site class.

5 Design spectral response acceleration parameters,  \( S_{DS} \)  and  \( S_{D1} \) .

6 Seismic design category.

7 Basic seismic force-resisting system(s).

8 Design base shear(s).

9 Seismic response coefficient(s),  \( C_{s} \) .

10 Response modification coefficient(s), R.

11 Analysis procedure used.

Providing the earthquake load design basis on the construction documents facilitates the plan review process. All buildings, except those indicated in the exceptions to Section 1613.1, are to be designed for earthquake effects. The earthquake design data for a specific building are required to meet or exceed the minimum requirements established by Section 1613.

1603.1.6 Geotechnical information. The design load-bearing values of soils shall be shown on the construction documents.

Load-bearing values for soils must be documented so that the foundation design can be verified.

1603.1.7 Flood design data. For buildings located in whole or in part in flood hazard areas as established in Section 5.1 of SBC 301, the following information shall be shown, regardless of whether flood loads govern the design of the building:

1 In flood hazard areas not subject to high-velocity wave action, the elevation of the proposed lowest floor, including the basement.

2 In flood hazard areas not subject to high-velocity wave action, the elevation to which any non-residential building will be dry floodproofed.

3 In flood hazard areas subject to high-velocity wave action, the proposed elevation of the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor, including the basement.

The flood hazard elevation information to be shown on the construction documents by the registered design professional provides information that allows the building official to facilitate the plan review process. If any portion of a building is in a flood hazard area, then the building must meet the corresponding flood requirements. Depending on the nature of the flood hazard area (flood zone), certain elevation requirements are to be met.

1603.1.8 Special loads. Special loads that are applicable to the design of the building, structure or portions thereof, including but not

===== Page 1509 =====
limited to the loads of machinery or equipment, and that are greater than specified floor and roof loads shall be specified by their descriptions and locations.

Indication of special loads on the construction documents facilitates the plan review process. The design professional is expected to identify any special loads that the occupancy will impose on the structure. These could include the operating weight of specialty equipment, for instance. There are also instances outside of Chapter 16 where the code specifies loading criteria that the structural design must address. For example, Section 415.9.2 requires that liquid petroleum gas facilities be in accordance with NFPA58. In that document, a room housing a liquefied petroleum gas distribution facility must be separated from an adjacent use with ceilings and walls that are designed for a static pressure of  \( 5 \, kN/m^{2} \) .

1603.1.8.1 Photovoltaic panel systems. The dead load of roof-top-mounted photovoltaic panel systems, including rack support systems, shall be indicated on the construction documents.

Providing the loads caused by photovoltaic panel systems facilitates the plan review process. Although dead loads are not generally provided on the construction documents, the dead loads from photovoltaic panel systems can affect large areas of a structure's roof and should be provided, including the weight of rack supports and any ballast.

1603.1.9 Roof rain load data. Rain intensity, i (cm/hr), shall be shown regardless of whether rain loads govern the design.

Indicating rain intensity on the design documents facilitates the plan review process. The rain load rarely governs the design, but consideration of rain loads impacts the design of the primary and secondary roof drainage systems. See Section 1611.

## SECTION 1604 GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS

1604.1 General. Building, structures and parts thereof shall be designed and constructed in accordance with strength design, load and resistance factor design, allowable stress design, empirical design or conventional construction methods, as permitted by the applicable material chapters and referenced standards.

This section identifies the various design methods that are permitted by the code and referenced design standards. The details for these design methods are either explicitly specified in the code or are located in the design standards that are referenced in the structural material design chapters for concrete, aluminum, masonry, steel and wood. For example, empirical design of masonry is addressed in Section 2109. The design of masonry using allowable stress design is required to be in accordance with SBC 305 with the modifications in Section 2107.

1604.2 Strength. Buildings and other structures, and parts thereof, shall be designed and constructed to support safely the factored loads in load combinations defined in this code without exceeding the appropriate strength limit states for the materials of construction. Alternatively, buildings and other structures, and parts thereof, shall be designed and constructed to support safely the nominal loads in load combinations defined in this code without exceeding the appropriate specified allowable stresses for the materials of construction.

Loads and forces for occupancies or uses not covered in this chapter shall be subject to the approval of the building official.

This section describes the strength and allowable stress design methods in the code. It also gives the building official approval authority for structural loads in buildings used for occupancies that are not specifically addressed in this chapter.

1604.3 Serviceability. Structural systems and members thereof shall be designed to have adequate stiffness to limit deflections as indicated in Table 1604.3.

The stated objective in this section is to limit member deflections and system drifts by providing adequate stiffness. Note that the definition of "Limit state" describes both a serviceability limit state, a condition beyond which a structure or member is no longer useful for its intended purpose; and a strength limit state, beyond which the structure or member is considered unsafe. The code does not directly address a serviceability limit state. Instead, the code limits certain member deflections for specific nominal loads.

The deflection limits for structural members must be in accordance with the requirements in this and subsequent sections. This section also provides a reference to the story drift limitations in the earthquake provisions. Generally, deflection limits are needed for the comfort of the building occupants and so that the structural member's deflection does not cause damage to supported construction. Excessive deflection can also contribute to excessive vibration, which is discomforting to the occupants of the building.

See Table 1604.3.

The deflection limits in this table apply where they are more restrictive than those in the structural design standards that are indicated

===== Page 1510 =====
in Sections 1604.3.2 through 1604.3.5. Note that the deflection limits for exterior walls and interior partitions vary depending on the type of finish (i.e., flexible, plaster or stucco, or other brittle finishes). A flexible finish is intended to be one that has been designed to accommodate the higher deflection indicated and remain serviceable. A brittle finish is any finish that has not been designed to accommodate the deflection allowed for a flexible finish. The more restrictive limit for plaster or stucco is based on ASTM C926. The deflection limit for a roof member supporting a plaster ceiling is intended to apply only for a plaster ceiling. The limit for a roof member supporting a gypsum board ceiling is that listed in the table for "supporting a nonplaster ceiling."

The answers to the following frequently asked questions provide further guidance on applying the deflection limits of the code.

Frequently Asked Questions—Table 1604.3
Q1. For purposes of checking the deflection limits of Table 1604.3, should the calculated wind load be used directly or the combined loads from Section 1605.3.1 or 1605.3.2?

A1. In computing deflections to verify compliance with Table 1604.3 limits, the loads shown in the column headings of Table 1604.3 are the only loads that must be applied to the member. The load used to check the deflection in this case is W, the nominal wind load in accordance with Section 1609. It is not necessary to use the load combinations of Section 1605.3 for verifying that the deflection limits have been met.

Q2. Note f permits the wind load to be taken as 0.42 times the “component and cladding” loads for the purpose of determining deflection limits. Please explain the basis for this 0.42 adjustment.

A2. There are two aspects to this adjustment. The first is the conversion from a wind speed with a 50-year mean recurrence interval (MRI) to a 10-year MRI event at an allowable stress design level. The mapped wind speeds of the code have generally been based on an MRI of 50 years. Serviceability checks, such as deflection, have typically been based on a lower MRI (for example, 10 years). The ASCE 7 commentary to the 2005 edition provided factors to convert to wind speeds with MRIs other than 50 years in Table C6-7. For wind speeds between 38 m/s and 45 m/s, the factor for 10 years in Table C6-7 was 0.84. This conversion factor applies to the wind speed, V. Since design wind pressure is a function of  \( V^{2} \) , the conversion factor must be squared before applying it to the design wind pressure. The factor 0.84 squared is 0.7056, which is rounded off to 0.7. The second aspect is the conversion of the wind load from strength level to allowable stress design level, which means the 0.7 factor is multiplied by 0.6, giving rise to the factor of 0.42 in the footnote.

Q3. In Table 1604.3, Note g states that the dead load shall be taken as zero for structural steel members. Would this apply to the precomposition check of composite beam deflection limits under wet weight of concrete? A3. No. The serviceability requirements of Section 1604.3 apply to the finished construction. The loading condition described would be a construction consideration, which is not directly regulated by the serviceability criteria.

The deflections. The deflections of structural members shall not exceed the more restrictive of the limitations of Sections 1604.3.2 through 1604.3.5 or that permitted by Table 1604.3.

The deflection of structural members is limited by the code, as well as certain material standards for damage control of supported construction and human comfort. Generally, the public equates visible deflection, or even detectable vibration, with a potentially unsafe condition (which in many cases is not true). The intent of this section is that calculated deflection is not to exceed either the limitations in the applicable material design standard or the applicable specified requirements.

1604.3.2 Reinforced concrete. The deflection of reinforced concrete structural members shall not exceed that permitted by SBC 304.

The deflection limitations in SBC 304 are not to be exceeded for reinforced (and prestressed) concrete (see SBC 304 for detailed deflection requirements).

1604.3.3 Steel. The deflection of steel structural members shall not exceed that permitted by SBC 306, SBC 308, ASCE 8, SJI 200 or SJI 100, as applicable.

The design standard to be met depends on the type of steel structural member. For example, steel joists are to meet the deflection limitations in the Steel Joist Institute's (SJI) standard, which is applicable to the type of joist, and rolled steel members are to meet the deflection criteria in SBC 306.

1604.3.4 Masonry. The deflection of masonry structural members shall not exceed that permitted by SBC 305.

The deflection limits for masonry beams and lintels is specified in SBC 305.

1604.3.5 Aluminum. The deflection of aluminum structural members shall not exceed that permitted by AA ADM.

===== Page 1511 =====
The deflection of aluminum structural members is limited to that in AA ADM for aluminum or that permitted by Table 1604.3 of the code.

1604.3.6 Limits. The deflection limits of Section 1604.3.1 shall be used unless more restrictive deflection limits are required by a referenced standard for the element or finish material.

The limits specified in Table 1604.3 apply to the indicated members for any structural material. As indicated in Section 1604.3.1, the deflection limits in the structural material standards apply when they are more restrictive than indicated in the table.

1604.3.7 Framing supporting glass. The deflection of framing members supporting glass subjected to 0.6 times the “component and cladding” wind loads shall not exceed either of the following:

1 1/175 of the length of span of the framing member, for framing members having a length not more than 4100 mm.

2 1/240 of the length of span of the framing member + 6.4 mm, for framing members having a length greater than 4100 mm.

This section establishes the appropriate deflection limit for exterior wall framing members that are supporting glass. It is based on criteria given in AAMA TIR-11, Maximum Allowable Deflection of Framing Systems for Building Cladding Components at Design Wind Loads. This criterion has been used successfully by the fenestration industry for decades.

1604.4 Analysis. Load effects on structural members and their connections shall be determined by methods of structural analysis that take into account equilibrium, general stability, geometric compatibility and both short- and long-term material properties.

Members that tend to accumulate residual deformations under repeated service loads shall have included in their analysis the effects of added deformations expected to occur during their service life.

Any system or method of construction to be used shall be based on a rational analysis in accordance with well-established principles of mechanics. Such analysis shall result in a system that provides a complete load path capable of transferring loads from their point of origin to the load-resisting elements.

The total lateral force shall be distributed to the various vertical elements of the lateral force-resisting system in proportion to their rigidities, considering the rigidity of the horizontal bracing system or diaphragm. Rigid elements assumed not to be a part of the lateral force-resisting system are permitted to be incorporated into buildings provided that their effect on the action of the system is considered and provided for in the design. A diaphragm is rigid for the purpose of distribution of story shear and torsional moment when the lateral deformation of the diaphragm is less than or equal to two times the average story drift. Where required by SBC 301, provisions shall be made for the increased forces induced on resisting elements of the structural system resulting from torsion due to eccentricity between the center of application of the lateral forces and the center of rigidity of the lateral force-resisting system.

Every structure shall be designed to resist the effects caused by the forces specified in this chapter, including overturning, uplift and sliding. Where sliding is used to isolate the elements, the effects of friction between sliding elements shall be included as a force.

This section includes the general requirements for structural analysis. The principles stated in this section are those commonly found in structural engineering textbooks. The requirement that structural analysis be capable of demonstrating a complete load path is essential to the adequate resistance of the structural system to wind loads or earthquake effects. The load path is to be capable of transferring all of the loads from their point of application onto the structure to the foundation. It is also important that nonstructural rigid elements be properly accounted for in the design. For example, a partial-height rigid masonry wall placed between steel columns in a steel frame will resist the horizontal shear load and cause bending in the column unless a flexible joint is provided between the wall and the column.

The definition of 'Diaphragm' in Section 202.1 includes definitions that distinguish a rigid diaphragm from a flexible diaphragm. The distribution of forces in buildings with flexible diaphragms differs from those having rigid diaphragms. Where the diaphragm is determined to be flexible, the effect of torsion on the distribution of lateral forces is considered to be negligible and can therefore be neglected in the structural analysis. Otherwise, for structures having rigid diaphragms, this section requires the engineer to distribute lateral forces to the vertical supporting elements in proportion to their rigidities, and to include the effect of the increased forces induced on the vertical supporting elements resulting from torsion due

===== Page 1512 =====
to eccentricity between the center of mass and the center of rigidity.

This section requires that all elements of the structure be designed to resist the required earthquake and wind effects. The required level of resistance will be based on the appropriate load combinations of Section 1605. The term “counteracting” used in the section title refers to so-called counteracting load combinations, as opposed to those in which the load effects are additive. The effects of overturning, uplift and sliding are most pronounced in these counteractive load combinations.

1604.5 Risk category. Each building and structure shall be assigned a risk category in accordance with Table 1604.5. Where a referenced standard specifies an occupancy category, the risk category shall not be taken as lower than the occupancy category specified therein. Where a referenced standard specifies that the assignment of a risk category be in accordance with SBC 301, Table 1.5-1, Table 1604.5 shall be used in lieu of SBC 301, Table 1.5-1.

Exception: The assignment of buildings and structures to Tsunami Risk Categories III and IV is permitted to be in accordance with Section 6.4 of SBC 301.

This section requires risk categories to be assigned based on descriptions in the "nature of occupancy" column in Table 1604.5. The risk category serves as a threshold for a variety of code provisions related to earthquake, flood, and wind loads. Particularly noteworthy are the importance factors that are used in the calculation of design earthquake, and wind loads. The value of the importance factor generally increases with the importance of the facility. Structures assigned greater importance factors must be designed for larger forces. The result is a more robust structure that would be less likely to sustain damage under the same conditions than a structure with a lower importance factor. The intent is to enhance a structure's performance based on its use or the need to remain in operation during and after a design event.

The impact of a higher risk category classification is not limited to increasing the design loads. Compared to Risk Category I, II or III, for instance, a Risk Category IV classification can lead to a higher seismic design category classification that can, in turn, require more stringent seismic detailing and limitations on the seismic-force-resisting system. This can also affect the seismic design requirements for architectural, mechanical and electrical components and systems.
The risk category determined in Table 1604.5 generally increases with the importance of the facility, which relates to the availability of the facility after an emergency, and the consequence of a structural failure on human life. The categories range from Risk Category I, which represents the lowest hazard to life, through Risk Category IV, which encompasses essential facilities.

Risk Category IV: These are buildings that are considered to be essential in that their continuous use is needed, particularly in response to disasters. Fire, rescue and police stations, and emergency vehicle garages must remain operational during and after major events, such as earthquakes, floods or hurricanes. The phrase “designated as essential facilities” refers to designation by the building official that certain facilities are required for emergency response or disaster recovery. This provides jurisdictions the latitude to identify specific facilities that should be considered essential in responding to various types of emergencies. These could include structures that would not otherwise be included in this risk category. This designation would only be made with consideration of broader public policy, as well as emergency preparedness planning within the jurisdiction in question. The reasons for including facilities, such as hospitals, fire stations, police stations, emergency response operations centers, etc., should be self-evident. Some items warranting additional discussion are as follows:

- Designated emergency shelters and designated emergency response facilities. These items repeat the term “designated,” which is referring to designation by the building official that the facilities have been identified as necessary for sheltering evacuees or responding to emergencies (see discussion of “designated” above). For example, an elementary school having an occupant load of 275 would typically be considered a Risk Category III facility. If that school is designated as an emergency shelter, then the school will be considered a Risk Category IV building.

- Power-generating stations and other public utility facilities required as emergency backup facilities for Risk Category IV structures. A power-generating station or other utility (such as a natural gas facility) is to be classified as Risk Category IV only if the facility serves an emergency backup function for a Risk Category IV building, such as a fire station or police station. Otherwise, the power-generating station or utility should be classified as Risk Category III.

===== Page 1513 =====
Buildings and other structures containing quantities of highly toxic materials that exceed maximum allowable quantities per control area as given in Table 307.1(2) or per outdoor control area in accordance with SBC 801 and are sufficient to pose a threat to the public if released. This applies only to “Highly toxic materials” (see definition, Section 202), which are covered in the second row of Table 307.1(2). That table lists the maximum allowable quantities per control area of materials posing a health hazard. Since the use of control areas is permitted by Table 307.1(2), it is reasonable to recognize the control area for the purpose of making this risk category determination. In other words, this applies to occupancies that are classified as Group H-4 based on the quantities of highly toxic material exceeding the permitted quantity within a control area. However, recognizing control areas means that both the risk category as well as the occupancy classification could be lowered by adding either fire-resistance-rated walls or floor/ceiling assemblies in order to divide the building into a number of smaller control areas. The additional wording “… sufficient to pose a threat to the public if released,” places a further qualification on the material quantity, but it is subjective since the threat to the public could be difficult to determine. Also note that a Group H-4 occupancy classification could be based on exceeding the quantities permitted for toxics or corrosives [see Table 307.1(2)], but the presence of those materials would not affect the assessment of the facility as Risk Category IV.

Risk Category III: Risk Category III buildings include those occupancies that have relatively large numbers of occupants because of the overall size of the building. They also include uses that pose an elevated life-safety hazard to the occupants, such as public assembly, schools or colleges. In addition, Risk Category III includes uses where the occupants' ability to respond to an emergency is restricted, such as jails, or otherwise impaired, such as nursing homes, which house care recipients who require skilled nursing care. A discussion of some of the specific table listings follows:

Buildings and other structures with a primary occupancy that is public assembly with an occupant load greater than 300. Public assembly occupancies meeting this criterion will typically be classified as Group A in Chapter 3. The wording requires agreement on the determination that a building's "primary occupancy" is in fact public assembly. This could be as simple as verifying that the portion of the building housing the public assembly occupancy is more than 50 percent of the total building area.

Buildings and other structures containing one or more public assembly spaces, each having an occupant load greater than 300 and a cumulative occupant load of these public assembly spaces of greater than 2,500. This item covers buildings containing at least one assembly space of 300 or more and having a cumulative occupant load of these public assembly spaces of 2,500 or more.

• Group I-2 occupancies with an occupant load of 50 or more care recipients, but not having emergency surgery or emergency treatment facilities. This category applies to health care facilities with at least 50 resident care recipients. The term “resident care recipient” refers to locations where those care recipients receive around-the-clock (24-hour) care as opposed to ambulatory surgery centers or outpatient units. This table entry covers facilities where care recipients have difficulty responding to an emergency or are incapable of self-preservation.

• Any other occupancy with an occupant load greater than 5,000. Uses that pose elevated life-safety concerns, such as public assembly uses, schools and health care facilities, are covered elsewhere and have a much lower threshold based on the number of occupants. This table entry covers buildings that are large enough to have more than 5,000 occupants, providing added protection for the occupants of larger structures whatever the use happens to be. In order to determine occupant load, the methods outlined in Section 1004 are normally used. Chapter 10 sets forth standards that provide a reasonably conservative number of occupants for all spaces, and while actual loads are commonly less than the design amount, it is not unusual in the life of a space in a building to have periods when high actual occupant loads exist. Because there is no clear rationale that connects the occupant load used to calculate minimum means of egress requirements to the risks associated with structural design, Note a provides some reasonable adjustment to this determination by permitting the use of net floor area. It provides a more reasonable approach for occupancies, such as office, mercantile and residential, that are required to base occupant load on gross area—an area that includes corridors, stairways, elevators.

===== Page 1514 =====
closets, accessory areas, structural walls and columns, etc.

Power-generating stations, treatment facilities for potable water, wastewater treatment and other public utilities not included in Risk Category IV. A failure and subsequent shutdown of these types of facilities would not pose an immediate threat to life safety. These infrastructure items are considered Risk Category III because of the impact an extended disruption in service can have on the public.

Buildings and other structures not included in Risk Category IV containing quantities of toxic or explosive materials that exceed permitted quantities per control area in Table 307.1(1) or 307.1(2) and are sufficient to pose a threat to the public if released. Buildings included under Risk Category IV would be those containing quantities of highly toxic materials that exceed the permitted quantity in Table 307.1(2) (see discussion under “Risk Category IV” above). This item addresses buildings with explosives or toxic substances, both of which are defined in Section 307.2.

Risk Category II: Risk Category II buildings represent a lesser hazard to life because of fewer building occupants and smaller building size compared to those that are considered Risk Category III. Since Risk Categories III and IV represent buildings with higher risk or essential facilities, on a relative scale Risk Category II can be thought of as a “standard occupancy” building as evidenced by importance factors for earthquake and wind that are all equal to 1. Most buildings and structures are considered to be Risk Category II.

Risk Category I: Risk Category I buildings exhibit the lowest hazard to life since they have few or no human occupants or are temporary, thus creating considerably less exposure to the hazards of earthquakes, floods, and wind than that of a permanent structure. Note that this category includes “minor storage facilities,” but the code does not provide an explanation of which storage facilities could be considered minor.

1604.5.1 Multiple occupancies. Where a building or structure is occupied by two or more occupancies not included in the same risk category, it shall be assigned the classification of the highest risk category corresponding to the various occupancies. Where buildings or structures have two or more portions that are structurally separated, each portion shall be separately classified. Where a separated portion of a building or structure provides required access to, required egress from or shares life safety components with another portion having a higher risk category, both portions shall be assigned to the higher risk category.

Exception: Where a storm shelter designed and constructed in accordance with ICC 500 is provided in a building, structure or portion thereof normally occupied for other purposes, the risk category for the normal occupancy of the building shall apply unless the storm shelter is a designated emergency shelter in accordance with Table 1604.5.
Buildings are frequently occupied by a mixture of uses or occupancies. Where multiple occupancies are proposed in a building, the risk category of each one must be considered. In some cases, the proposed occupancies in a building will fall into more than one risk category and the requirements for multiple occupancies stated in Section 1604.5.1 must be satisfied. The code identifies two design options for mixed-use buildings. The entire structure can be designed as a single unit based on the requirements for the most stringent risk category for the building. Alternatively, the engineer can structurally separate portions of the structure containing distinct occupancy categories and design each portion accordingly based on its risk category. This section also provides direction regarding access to and egress from adjacent structures that fall into different occupancy categories by making the requirements for the more stringent risk category applicable to both structures. This requirement is the result of lessons learned from events, such as earthquakes, in which essential functions have been rendered unusable because of a failure in an adjacent structure.

The exception addresses ICC 500-compliant storm shelters that are designed and constructed to resist extreme wind loads, have requirements for structural stability and vertical and horizontal load transfer, and have egress that meet or exceed the basic requirements of the building code for the normal occupancy of multiuse storm shelters. Even if the storm shelter is not structurally separated from the host building, ICC 500 details the strength requirements for the members of the host building that connect to the storm shelter. Issues related to protection of occupants due to building collapse or failure have been considered by the ICC 500 and do not need to be addressed for the other portions of the facility.

ICC 500 Section 104.1, Storm shelters within host buildings, states: "Where designated

===== Page 1515 =====
storm shelters are constructed as a room or space within a host building that will normally be occupied for other purposes, the requirements of the applicable code for the occupancy of the building, or the individual rooms or spaces thereof, shall apply unless otherwise required by ICC 500.

Further, the storm shelter is a self-contained and defined space within the building that does not rely on other portions of the building for life-safety protection from high winds, floods, or structural collapse. Hardening the other portions of the building that are outside the storm shelter or increasing the risk category for portions of the building that may be used to egress the space is not necessitated. The statements in Section 1604.5.1 regarding egress are to be applied when a building or portion thereof is being used to provide long-term, post-disaster response capabilities that would have considerable consequences to the community outside the occupied building and does not apply to ICC 500-compliant storm shelters.

The storm shelter is intended to provide short-term, life safety in the event of a severe storm when the host building cannot. This protection provided by ICC 500-compliant storm shelters allows a building owner to provide a storm shelter in one portion of the structure as opposed to requiring the structure to meet the Risk Category IV provisions.

1604.6 In-situ load tests. The building official is authorized to require an engineering analysis or a load test, or both, of any construction whenever there is reason to question the safety of the construction for the intended occupancy. Engineering analysis and load tests shall be conducted in accordance with Section 1708.

Engineering analyses and load tests are means of assessing whether there exists a significant risk to life safety from a structure. The building official should document his or her reasons for invoking this section. A third-party review by an engineering firm acceptable to both the building official and the owner would be appropriate in the event that a structural analysis is required. A load test is also an appropriate means of assessing a structure. If the structure being tested supports the test loads and meets the performance criteria in the applicable standard or test protocol, the structure or element is deemed to have sufficient structural capacity. Test protocols for concrete and steel are provided in SBC 304 and SBC 306, respectively. Load tests can also be used by engineers who want to verify that a structure has sufficient capacity.
1604.7 Preconstruction load tests. Materials and methods of construction that are not capable of being designed by approved engineering analysis or that do not comply with the applicable referenced standards, or alternative test procedures in accordance with Section 1707, shall be load tested in accordance with Section 1709.

The alternative test procedure described in Section 1707 and the preconstruction load test procedure described in Section 1709 are intended to apply to materials or an assembly of structural materials that generally do not have an accepted analysis technique; thus, they are approved for use by way of the alternative test procedure. The preconstruction test procedure in Section 1709 includes the determination of the allowable superimposed design load (see Section 1709 for details).

1604.8 Anchorage. Buildings and other structures, and portions thereof, shall be provided with anchorage in accordance with Sections 1604.8.1 through 1604.8.3, as applicable.

Sections 1604.8.1 through 1604.8.3 contain general anchorage requirements as well as specific requirements for the anchorage of walls and decks.

1604.8.1 General. Anchorage of the roof to walls and columns, and of walls and columns to foundations, shall be provided to resist the uplift and sliding forces that result from the application of the prescribed loads.

This section specifies load path requirements for anchorage already required in more general terms by Section 1604.4. Required anchorage resistance to uplift and sliding is determined in accordance with the appropriate load combinations in Section 1605, which account for the effects of earthquakes, fluid pressures, lateral earth pressure or wind.

1604.8.2 Structural walls. Walls that provide vertical load-bearing resistance or lateral shear resistance for a portion of the structure shall be anchored to the roof and to all floors and members that provide lateral support for the wall or that are supported by the wall. The connections shall be capable of resisting the horizontal forces specified in Section 1.4.4 of SBC 301 for walls of structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A and to Section 12.11 of SBC 301 for walls of structures assigned to all other seismic design categories. Required anchors in masonry walls of hollow units or cavity walls shall be embedded in a reinforced grouted structural element of the wall. See Sections 1609 for wind design requirements and 1613 for earthquake design requirements.

This section refers to SBC 301 technical provisions for the minimum strength design

===== Page 1516 =====
load on anchorages of walls to the horizontal diaphragms that provide lateral support. The connection requirements apply to both bearing walls and walls that resist lateral loads. The wall anchorage must be a positive connection that does not rely on friction for load transfer. Earthquake detailing provisions may result in higher anchorage design forces based on the seismic design category of the building, as well as the mass of the wall.

1604.8.3 Decks. Where supported by attachment to an exterior wall, decks shall be positively anchored to the primary structure and designed for both vertical and lateral loads as applicable. Such attachment shall not be accomplished by the use of toenails or nails subject to withdrawal. Where positive connection to the primary building structure cannot be verified during inspection, decks shall be self-supporting. Connections of decks with cantilevered framing members to exterior walls or other framing members shall be designed for both of the following:

1 The reactions resulting from the dead load and live load specified in Table 1607.1, in accordance with Section 1605, acting on all portions of the deck.

2 The reactions resulting from the dead load and live load specified in Table 1607.1, in accordance with Section 1605, acting on the cantilevered portion of the deck, and no live load on the remaining portion of the deck.

This requirement for the positive anchorage of decks is a result of failures that have occurred primarily on nonengineered residential decks. Toenail connections are relatively weak and less reliable since many of the field connections split the wood framing member. Nails that are installed in line with applied tension forces pull out easily.

In order to make the loading considerations clear for decks with cantilevers, this section states the two loading conditions that are applicable. The second condition covers the case where uplift can occur at the back-span support. This highlights the need for resistance to uplift by a positive connection at the exterior wall.

1604.9 Wind and seismic detailing. Lateral force-resisting systems shall meet seismic detailing requirements and limitations prescribed in this code and SBC 301 Chapter 11, 12, 13, 15, 17, and 18 as applicable, even where wind load effects are greater than seismic load effects.

Exception: References within SBC 301 to Chapter 14 shall not apply, except as specifically required herein.
This section is needed to clarify that the seismic detailing requirements of the code always apply, even where the wind load effects are higher than the seismic load effects. This is required because the calculated earthquake load is dependent on an assumed level of ductility to be provided in the selected seismic-force-resisting system. If the designer does not follow through by providing the detailed required to achieve the ductility of the selected system, the assumption is invalid, and the structure may not perform adequately in the event of an earthquake.

For example, consider the case where the earthquake load provisions apply in accordance with Section 1613.1, the seismic-force-resisting system is an ordinary concentrically braced steel frame and, based on the seismic design category, Section 2205 requires that the AISC 341 seismic provisions are to be met. For this case, the requirements in Section 14 of AISC 341 must be satisfied in the design of the steel frame, even if the wind load effects exceed the seismic load effects.

1604.10 Loads on storm shelters. Loads and load combinations on storm shelters shall be determined in accordance with ICC 500.

Since this chapter does not include any other requirements for storm shelter wind loads, it could be misinterpreted that Risk Category IV wind speeds are appropriate for storm shelters. Risk Category IV wind speeds are based on a mean recurrence interval (MRI) of 3,000 years, while ICC-500 wind speeds are based on an MRI of 10,000 years for hurricane shelters and approximately 20,000 to 1 million years for tornadoes. This code change clarifies that the more severe wind loads specified in ICC-500 are required for storm shelters.

## SECTION 1605 LOAD COMBINATIONS

1605.1 General. Buildings and other structures and portions thereof shall be designed to resist the Strength Load Combinations specified in SBC 301 Section 2.3, the Allowable Stress Design Load Combinations specified in SBC 301 Section 2.4, or the Alternative Allowable Stress Design Load Combinations of Section 1605.2:

1 The modifications to Load Combinations of SBC 301 Section 2.3, SBC 301 Section 2.4, and Section 1605.2 specified in SBC 301 Chapters 18 and 19 shall apply.

2 When the Allowable Stress Design Load Combinations of SBC 301 Section 2.4 are used, and roof live loads of 1.45 kN/m \( ^{2} \)  or less need not be combined with seismic load.

3 Where the Allowable Stress Design Load Combinations of SBC 301 Section 2.4 are used, crane hook loads need not be combined

===== Page 1517 =====
with roof live loads or one-half of the wind loads.

Generally, there are two types of load combinations specified in the code: those to be used with a strength design [or load and resistance factor design (LRFD)] and those to be used with allowable stress design or alternative allowable stress design. Where additional load combinations are specified in the structural material chapters, they apply also. Note that this section also requires that for a given load combination engineers also consider additional load cases where one or more variable loads are not acting concurrently with other variable loads. It is necessary to explore such possibilities since they can at times result in the most critical load effect for some elements of a structure. According to the definition of "Loads," loads that are not considered permanent are variable loads.

1605.1.1 Stability. Regardless of which load combinations are used to design for strength, where overall structure stability (such as stability against overturning, sliding, or buoyancy) is being verified, use of the load combinations specified in SBC 301 Section 2.3, SBC 301 Section 2.4, and in Section 1605.2 shall be permitted. Where the load combinations specified in Section 1605.2 are used, strength reduction factors applicable to soil resistance shall be provided by a registered design professional. The stability of retaining walls shall be verified in accordance with Section 7.4 of SBC 303.

This section permits soil resistance and strength reduction factors to be considered where strength design factored loads are used in foundation design.

1605.2 Alternative basic load combinations. In lieu of the load combinations in SBC 301, Section 2.4, structures and portions thereof shall be permitted to be designed for the most critical effects resulting from the following combinations. Where using these alternative allowable stress load combinations that include wind or seismic loads, allowable stresses are permitted to be increased or load combinations reduced where permitted by the material chapter of this code or the referenced standards. For load combinations that include the counteracting effects of dead and wind loads, only two-thirds of the minimum dead load likely to be in place during a design wind event shall be used. Where using these alternative load combinations to evaluate sliding, overturning and soil bearing at the soil-structure interface, the reduction of foundation overturning from Section 12.13.4 in SBC 301 shall not be used. Where using these alternative basic load combinations for proportioning foundations for loadings, which include seismic loads, the vertical seismic load effect,  \( E_{p} \) , in Equation 12.4-4 of SBC 301 is permitted to be taken equal to zero. Where required by SBC 301, Chapters 12, 13 and 15, the load combinations including over-strength of SBC 301, Section 2.4.5 shall be used.

 \[ \begin{array}{c}D+L+(L_{r}or R)\\D+L+0.6W\\D+L+0.6W/2\\D+L+E/1.4\\0.9D+E/1.4\end{array} \quad (16-1) \quad (16-2) \quad (16-3) \quad (16-4) \quad (16-5) \]

Exceptions:

1. Crane hook loads need not be combined with roof live loads or one-half of the wind load.

2. Roof live loads of 1.45 kN/m \( ^{2} \)  or less need not be combined with seismic loads.

These are alternative load combinations to those in Section 1605.2 for use with allowable stress design. They are based on the allowable stress load combinations in the Uniform Building Code \( ^{TM} \)  (UBC \( ^{TM} \) ).

Exception 1 for crane hook loads has been a longstanding allowance under the legacy model codes that were also the source of these alternative basic load combinations. It allows special consideration in combining crane live loads with wind, and roof live loads due to a lower probability that these maximum loads occur simultaneously.

## SECTION 1606 DEAD LOADS

1606.1 General. Dead loads are those loads defined in Chapter 2 of this code. Dead loads shall be considered to be permanent loads.

The nominal dead load, D, is determined in accordance with Section 1606. Similar to the general section on live loads (see Section 1607.1), this section provides a reminder that the term "Dead load" is defined, establishing exactly what should be considered a dead load. It also states that dead loads are considered permanent. Whether a load is permanent, or variable is a necessary distinction to make when applying the provisions for load combinations. When determining the design dead loads, the actual weights of all materials, equipment, construction, etc., are to be used for the structural design. Often the exact materials and equipment to be installed have not yet been determined by the design team at the time the structural design is initiated. Where the actual weights are not known, it is common to use an estimate of the anticipated materials and equipment. While the actual dead load itself does not vary, the estimate of the dead load that is used in structural computations can vary. Such estimates of dead loads are

===== Page 1518 =====
typically greater than the actual dead loads so that the computations are conservative, and a redesign of the structure will not be necessary when the actual weights become known. This section clarifies that the building official must approve these estimated dead loads.

Overestimating the actual dead load, so that the design computations are conservative, is acceptable when considering load combinations in Section 1605 that are additive. But the same cannot be said when using counteracting load combinations. In determining the anchorage required to resist the overturning or uplift effects of wind or seismic loads, some resistance is typically provided by the dead load. For example, wind uplift forces cause tension to develop in hold-down connections. If the dead load used to resist the wind uplift is overestimated, the resulting resistance to overturning or uplift will be less than intended.

As a design guideline, see the unit weights of common construction materials and assemblies in Tables 3-1 and 3-2 of SBC 301. The unit dead loads listed in the tables for assembled elements are usually given in units of kN/m² of surface area (e.g., floor areas, wall areas, ceiling areas, etc.). Unit dead loads for materials used in construction are given in terms of density. The unit weights given in the tables are generally single values, even though a range of weights may actually exist. The average unit weights given are generally suitable for design purposes. However, where there is reason to believe that the actual weights of assembled elements or construction materials may substantially exceed the tabular values, then the situation should be investigated, and the higher values used.

1606.2 Weights of materials of construction. For purposes of design, the actual weights of materials of construction shall be used. In the absence of definite information, values used shall be subject to the approval of the building official.

See the commentary to Section 1606.1.
1606.3 Weight of fixed service equipment. In determining dead loads for purposes of design, the weight of fixed service equipment, including the maximum weight of the contents of fixed service equipment, shall be included. The components of fixed service equipment that are variable, such as liquid contents and movable trays, shall not be used to counteract forces causing overturning, sliding, and uplift conditions in accordance with Section 1.3.6 of SBC 301.

Exceptions:

1. Where force effects are the result of the presence of the variable components, the components are permitted to be used to counter those load effects. In such cases, the structure shall be designed for force effects with the variable components present and with them absent.

2. For the calculation of seismic force effects, the components of fixed service equipment that are variable, such as liquid contents and movable trays, need not exceed those expected during normal operation.

The weight of fixed service equipment includes both the empty weight of the equipment and the maximum weight of the contents. For example, the weight of liquids is to be included in the dead load of piping and tanks and the weight of conduit and wiring is to be included in the dead load of cable trays. Since the content weight is variable, it cannot be counted on to counteract overturning, sliding and uplift conditions.

Exception 1 indicates that when the variable content weight is the source of the force causing overturning, sliding or uplift, it can be used to counteract the force. For example, the liquid in a tank is the primary source of the seismic mass of the tank and therefore can be used to resist seismic uplift; however, the liquid cannot be used to resist overturning, sliding, and uplift from wind loads.

Exception 2 indicates that the maximum weight of the contents does not have to be used when calculating the seismic forces; rather, the weight that exists during normal operation can be used. This is consistent with the methodology used for including variable components in the determination of the seismic weight.

1606.4 Photovoltaic panel systems. The weight of photovoltaic panel systems, their support system, and ballast shall be considered as dead load.

See the commentary to Section 1606.1.

1606.5 Vegetative and landscaped roofs. The weight of all landscaping and hardscaping materials for vegetative and landscaped roofs shall be considered as dead load. The weight shall be computed considering both fully saturated soil and drainage layer materials and fully dry soil and drainage layer materials to determine the most severe load effects on the structure.

See the commentary to Section 1606.1.

## SECTION 1607 LIVE LOADS

1607.1 General. Live loads are those loads defined in Chapter 2 of this code.

Nominal live loads are determined in accordance with Section 1607. The live load requirements for the design of buildings and structures are based on the type of occupancy. Live loads are transient loads that vary with time. Generally, the design live load is that

===== Page 1519 =====
which is believed to be near the maximum transient load that is reasonably expected to occur for a given occupancy.

The design values of live loads for both uniform and concentrated loads are shown in the Table 1607.1 as a function of occupancy. The values given are conservative and include both the sustained and variable portions of the live load. Section 1607.3 directs the designer to utilize the greater live loads produced by the intended occupancy, but not less than the minimum uniformly distributed live loads listed in Table 1607.1.

1607.2 Loads not specified. For occupancies or uses not designated in Section 1607, the live load shall be determined in accordance with a method approved by the building official.

Whenever an occupancy or use of a structure cannot be identified by Section 1607, then the live load values used for design are required to be determined by the design professional and subject to the approval of the building official. Aside from the obvious intent of this requirement, which is to prescribe a minimum design load value, some caution needs to be exercised by the design professional in determining the appropriate design live load value. For example, the table shows that heavy storage areas must be designed for a uniform live load of 12 kN/m². This is a minimum value. Storage warehouses or storage areas within manufacturing facilities containing items such as automobile parts, electrical goods, coiled steel, plumbing supplies and bulk building materials generally have live loads ranging between 15 and 20 kN/m². Similarly, storage facilities containing dry goods, paints, oil, groceries often have loadings that range from 10 to 15 kN/m². Another example is a heavy manufacturing facility that makes generators for the electric power industry. Some of the production areas in this type of facility require structural floors that support loads of 48 kN/m² or more, which is about seven times the live load specified in Table 1607.1.

1607.3 Uniform live loads. The live loads used in the design of buildings and other structures shall be the maximum loads expected by the intended use or occupancy but shall not be less than the minimum uniformly distributed live loads given in Table 1607.1.

Studies have shown that building live loads consist of a sustained portion based on the day-to-day use of the facilities, and a variable portion created by unusual events, such as remodeling, temporary storage of materials, the extraordinary assemblage of people for an occasional business meeting or social function (e.g., a holiday party) and similar events. The sustained portion of the live load will likely vary during the life of a building because of tenant changes, rearrangement of office space and furnishings, changes in the nature of the occupancy (i.e., number of people or type of business), traffic patterns and so on. In light of the variability of loadings that are apt to be imposed on a building, the code provisions simplify the design procedure by expressing the applicable load as either a uniformly distributed live load or a concentrated live load on the floor area. It should be pointed out that this section does not require the concurrent application of uniform live load and concentrated live load. In other words, this section requires that either the uniform load or the concentrated load be applied, so long as the type of load that produces the greater stress in the structural element under consideration is utilized.

1607.4 Concentrated live loads. Floors, roofs, and other similar surfaces shall be designed to support the uniformly distributed live loads prescribed in Section 1607.3 or the concentrated live loads, given in Table 1607.1, whichever produces the greater load effects. Unless otherwise specified, the indicated concentration shall be assumed to be uniformly distributed over an area of 750 mm by 750 mm and shall be located so as to produce the maximum load effects in the structural members.

Typically, a building or portion thereof is subjected to concentrated floor loads commensurate with the use of the facility. For example, in Group B, a law office may have stacks of books and files that impose large concentrations of loads on the supporting structural elements. An industrial facility may have a tank full of liquid material on a mezzanine that feeds a machine on the floor below. The structural floor of a stockroom may support heavy bins containing metal parts and so on. The exact locations or nature of such concentrated loadings is not usually known at the time of the design of the building. Further, new sources of concentrated loadings will be added during the life of the structure, while some or all of the existing sources will be relocated; therefore, because of the uncertainties of the sources of concentrated loads, as well as their weights and locations, the code provides typical loads to be used in the design of structural floors consistent with the type of use of the facility. The minimum concentrated loads to be used for design are contained in Table 1607.1. Concentrated loads are not required to be applied simultaneously with the uniform live loads also specified in Table 1607.1. Concentrated loads are to be

===== Page 1520 =====
applied as an independent load condition at the location on the floor that produces the greatest stress in the structural members being designed. The single concentrated load is to be placed at any location on the floor. For example, in an office use area, the floor system is to be designed for either a 9 kN concentrated load (unless the anticipated actual concentrated load is higher) applied at any location in the office area, or the 2.50 kN/m \( ^{2} \)  uniform load specified in Table 1607.1, whichever results in the greater stress in the supporting structural member.

1607.5 Partition loads. In office buildings and in other buildings where partition locations are subject to change, provisions for partition weight shall be made, whether or not partitions are shown on the construction documents, unless the specified live load is  \( 4  kN/m^{2} \)  or greater. The partition load shall be not less than a uniformly distributed live load of  \( 0.75  kN/m^{2} \) .

The weight of partitions must be provided for in the structural design. Buildings where partitions are subject to change must include a live load of  \( 0.75 \, kN/m^{2} \)  if the uniform floor live load is less than  \( 4 \, kN/m^{2} \) . This partition allowance is included under live loads because the loads may vary in size and location during the life of the building. The weight of any permanent partitions should be considered a dead load in accordance with the definition in Section 202.

1607.6 Helipads. Helipads shall be designed for the following live loads:

1 A uniform live load, L, as specified in Item 1.1 and 1.2. This load shall not be reduced.

1.12  \( kN/m^{2} \)  where the design basis helicopter has a maximum take-off weight of 13.5 kN or less.

1.23  \( kN/m^{2} \)  where the design basis helicopter has a maximum take-off weight greater than 13.5 kN.

2 A single concentrated live load, L, of 13.5 kN applied over an area of 100 mm by 100 mm and located so as to produce the maximum load effects on the structural elements under consideration. The concentrated load is not required to act concurrently with other uniform or concentrated live loads.

3 Two single concentrated live loads, L, 2.45 m apart applied on the landing pad (representing the helicopter's two main landing gear, whether skid type or wheeled type), each having a magnitude of 0.75 times the maximum take-off weight of the helicopter and located so as to produce the maximum load effects on the structural elements under consideration. The concentrated loads shall be applied over an area of 200 mm by 200 mm and are not required to act concurrently with other uniform or concentrated live loads.

Landing areas designed for a design basis helicopter with maximum take-off weight of 13.5 kN shall be identified with a 13.5 kN weight limitation. The landing area weight limitation shall be indicated by the numeral “13.5” (kN) located in the bottom right corner of the landing area as viewed from the primary approach path. The indication for the landing area weight limitation shall be a minimum 1.5 m in height.

Detailed requirements for helistops and helicopters, including definitions, can be found in Section 412 of the code. For example, Section 412.7.1 requires a minimum landing area size of 6 m by 6 m for helicopters weighing less than 15.5 kN. In addition, regulations are specified by SBC 801 for helistops and helicopters.

The term “helipad” is used to describe a helicopter landing area, which is the subject of this provision. These structural design requirements establish the minimum live load criteria that are specific to the design of the landing area and the supporting structural elements.

Items 1 and 2 specify the uniform live load based on the threshold weight of 13.5 kN. The majority of helicopters used in general aviation have a gross weight of 13.5 kN or less. While helicopter weights are comparable to these of passenger vehicles, they are dispersed over a larger area; thus the uniform load on these landing areas is lower than the minimum uniform live load required for a passenger vehicle parking garage and a reduced design live load is permitted for the design of such helipads. Since marking the weight limitation of the landing area is standard practice, as well as an FAA recommendation, indicating the weight limitation on the landing area was included as a condition for using the uniform load associated with helicopters weighing up to 13.5 kN.

1607.7 Passenger vehicle garages. Floors in garages or portions of a building used for the storage of motor vehicles shall be designed for the uniformly distributed live loads indicated in Table 1607.1 or the following concentrated load:

1 For garages restricted to passenger vehicles accommodating not more than nine passengers, 13.5 kN acting on an area of 115 mm by 115 mm.

===== Page 1521 =====
2 For mechanical parking structures without slab or deck that are used for storing passenger vehicles only, 10 kN per wheel.

This section establishes two criteria for addressing the concentrated live load requirements for passenger vehicle garages. See the commentary to Section 1607.1 and Table 1607.1.

1607.8 Heavy vehicle loads. Floors and other surfaces that are intended to support vehicle loads greater than a 45 kN gross vehicle weight rating shall comply with Sections 1607.8.1 through 1607.8.5.

Sections 1607.8.1 through 1607.8.5 give criteria for addressing heavy vehicle loads, including fire trucks and forklifts.

1607.8.1 Loads. Where any structure does not restrict access for vehicles that exceed a 45 kN gross vehicle weight rating, those portions of the structure subject to such loads shall be designed using the vehicular live loads, including consideration of impact and fatigue, in accordance with the codes and specifications required by the jurisdiction having authority for the design and construction of the road-ways and bridges in the same location of the structure.

Where heavy highway-type vehicles have access onto a structure, this section requires the structure to be designed to the specifications applicable to roadways in that jurisdiction. This loading may in fact be the loading from American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), or the loading for other elements such as lids of large detention tanks or utility vaults. The registered design professional should consult with the jurisdiction for design loads for these special conditions.

1607.8.2 Fire truck and emergency vehicles. Where a structure or portions of a structure are accessed and loaded by fire department access vehicles and other similar emergency vehicles, the structure shall be designed for the greater of the following loads:

1 The actual operational loads, including outrigger reactions and contact areas of the vehicles as stipulated and approved by the building official; or

2 The live loading specified in Section 1607.8.1.

This establishes two criteria for addressing heavy vehicle loads due to fire trucks and other similar emergency vehicles.

1607.8.3 Heavy vehicle garages. Garages designed to accommodate vehicles that exceed a 4500 kg gross vehicle weight rating, shall be designed using the live loading specified by Section 1607.8.1. For garages, the design for impact and fatigue is not required.

Exception: The vehicular live loads and load placement are allowed to be determined using the actual vehicle weights for the vehicles allowed onto the garage floors, provided that such loads and placement are based on rational engineering principles and are approved by the building official but shall be not less than 3 kN/m \( ^{2} \) . This live load shall not be reduced.

This section helps clarify that the passenger vehicle garage loads are not applicable to garages that accommodate heavier vehicles.

1607.8.4 Forklifts and movable equipment. Where a structure is intended to have forklifts or other movable equipment present, the structure shall be designed for the total vehicle or equipment load and the individual wheel loads for the anticipated vehicles as specified by the owner of the facility. These loads shall be posted in accordance with Section 1607.8.5

Heavy vehicle loads due to forklifts and other moveable equipment require that a structure be designed for the total vehicle or equipment load as well as the individual wheel loads. The owner of the facility must make the planned usage of such a vehicle clear to the design team. As a precaution, these loads must be posted (see Section 1607.8.5).

1607.8.4.1 Impact and fatigue. Impact loads and fatigue loading shall be considered in the design of the supporting structure. For the purposes of design, the vehicle and wheel loads shall be increased by 30 percent to account for impact.

This section clarifies that consideration of impact and fatigue loading is a design requirement for structures subjected to heavy moving equipment, such as forklifts.

1607.8.5 Posting. The maximum weight of vehicles allowed into or on a garage or other structure shall be posted by the owner or the owner's authorized agent in accordance with Section 106.1.

Posting the maximum allowed weight of vehicles allows vehicle operators to assess whether the structure was designed with their vehicle in mind, making it less likely that a vehicle will overload a structure.

1607.9 Loads on handrails, guards, grab bars and seats. Handrails and guards shall be designed and constructed for the structural loading conditions set forth in Section 1607.9.1. Grab bars, shower seats and accessible benches shall be designed and

===== Page 1522 =====
constructed for the structural loading conditions set forth in Section 1607.9.2.

The requirements of this section are intended to provide an adequate degree of structural strength and stability to handrails, guards, grab bars and accessible seats and benches.

1607.9.1 Handrails and guards. Handrails and guards shall be designed to resist a linear load of  \( 0.75 \, kN/m \)  in accordance with Section 4.5.1 of SBC 301. Glass handrail assemblies and guards shall also comply with Section 2407.

Exceptions:

1. For one- and two-family dwellings, only the single concentrated load required by Section 1607.9.1.1 shall be applied.

2. In Group I-3, F, H and S occupancies, for areas that are not accessible to the general public and that have an occupant load less than 50, the minimum load shall be 0.3 kN/m.

The loading in this section represents the maximum anticipated load on a handrail or guard due to a crowd of people on the adjacent walking surface. The exceptions allow lower loads for handrails in locations that are not typically open to the public. These loads, depicted in Commentary Figure 1607.9.1, are permitted to be applied independent of other loads.

1607.9.1.1 Concentrated load. Handrails and guards shall be designed to resist a concentrated load of 0.9 kN in accordance with Section 4.5.1 of SBC 301.

The concentrated loading in this section is not to be applied with any other design load; it is a separate load case. The load simulates the maximum anticipated load from a person grabbing or falling into the handrail or guard.

1607.9.1.2 Guard component loads. Balusters, panel fillers and guard infill components, including all rails except the handrail and the top rail, shall be designed to resist a concentrated load of 0.2 kN in accordance with Section 4.5.1.2 of SBC 301.

This is a localized design load for the guard members and is not to be applied with any other loads. The number of balusters that would resist this load are those within the 0.09 m² area in the plane of the guard as shown in Commentary Figure 1607.9.1.2.

1607.9.2 Grab bars, shower seats and accessible benches. Grab bars, shower seats and accessible benches shall be designed to resist a single concentrated load of 1.1 kN applied in any direction at any point on the grab bar, shower seat, or seat of the accessible bench so as to produce the maximum load effects.
These live loads provide for the loads associated with the use of the grab bars, shower seats and accessible benches. These structural requirements provide consistency with Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG).

1607.10 Vehicle barriers. Vehicle barriers for passenger vehicles shall be designed to resist a concentrated load of 27 kN in accordance with Section 4.5.3 of SBC 301. Garages accommodating trucks and buses shall be designed in accordance with an approved method that contains provisions for traffic railings.

Vehicle barriers provide a passive restraint system in locations where vehicles could fall to a lower level (see definition of "Vehicle barrier," Section 202). Commentary Figure 1607.10 depicts criteria for the design of passenger car and light truck vehicle barriers. The 27 kN load considers impact. The load is applied at a height, h, that is representative of vehicle bumper heights. Because of the variety of barrier configurations and anchorage methods, it is necessary to consider any height within the specified size in order to determine the most critical load effects for design of the barrier. For bus and heavy truck vehicle barrier design criteria, AASHTO LRFD Bridge Design Specifications shall be adopted (also see Section 1607.8).

1607.11 Impact loads. The live loads specified in Sections 1607.3 through 1607.10 shall be assumed to include adequate allowance for ordinary impact conditions. Provisions shall be made in the structural design for uses and loads that involve unusual vibration and impact forces.

In cases where “unusual” live loads occur in a building and impose impact or vibratory forces on structural elements (e.g., elevators, machinery, craneways, etc.), additional stresses and deflections are imposed on the structural system. Where unusual vibration (dynamic) and impact loads are likely to occur, the code requires that the structural design take these effects into account. Typically, the dynamic effects are approximated through the application of an equivalent static load equal to the dynamic load effects. In most cases, an equivalent static load is sufficient. A dynamic analysis is usually not required.

1607.11.1 Elevators. Members, elements and components subject to dynamic loads from elevators shall be designed for impact loads and deflection limits prescribed by ASME A17.1.

The static load of an elevator must be increased to account for the effect of the elevator's motion. For example, when an elevator comes to a stop, the load on the

===== Page 1523 =====
elevator's supports is significantly higher than the weight of the elevator and the occupants. This effect varies with the acceleration and deceleration rate of the elevator. This section clarifies that the impact load from elevators applies specifically to members, elements and components subject to dynamic loading from the elevator mechanism and directs the code user to the elevator standard to determine the increases.

1607.11.2 Machinery. For the purpose of design, the weight of machinery and moving loads shall be increased as follows to allow for impact:

1 light machinery, shaft- or motor-driven, 20 percent.

2 reciprocating machinery or power-driven units, 50 percent. Percentages shall be increased where specified by the manufacturer.

The specified increases for machinery loads include the vibration of the equipment, which increases the effective load. The load increase for reciprocating machinery versus rotating shaft-driven machinery is to account for the higher vibration.

1607.11.3 Elements supporting hoists for façade access and building maintenance equipment. In addition to any other applicable live loads, structural elements that support hoists for façade access and building maintenance equipment shall be designed for a live load of 2.5 times the rated load of the hoist or the stall load of the hoist, whichever is larger.

Facade access equipment is used to suspend workers over the side of a building for a number of reasons, including window washing, performing routine maintenance, replacing broken glazing, painting, hanging signs, etc. The Occupational Safety & Health Administration (OSHA) requires that elements that support the hoists or motors for facade access equipment must be able to sustain without failure at least four times the rated load of the hoist, where the rated load is the maximum anticipated load or the total design weight of the suspended platform plus occupants and equipment and supplies. In addition, OSHA requires façade access equipment used for activities such as painting or hanging signs or holiday lights to be designed to sustain without failure at least 1.5 times the stall load of the hoist, where the stall load is permitted to be as much as three times the rated load. Using a design live load of the greater of 2.5 times the rated load and the stall load of the hoist, when combined with a live load factor of 1.6, meets or slightly exceeds OSHA's requirements. The load is used to design the davit bases and anchorages that support façade access equipment as well as the structural elements that support the bases and anchorages.

1607.11.4 Fall arrest, lifeline, and rope descent system anchorages. In addition to any other applicable live loads, fall arrest, lifeline, and rope descent system anchorages and structural elements that support these anchorages shall be designed for a live load of not less than 13.8 kN for each attached line, in any direction that the load can be applied.

Anchorages of horizontal lifelines and the structural elements that support these anchorages shall be designed for the maximum tension that develops in the horizontal lifeline from these live loads.

Lifeline anchorages, also known as fall arrest anchorages, are called on to resist impact loads when a suspended worker on the face of a building experiences a fall. Because the loads are highly variable depending on the weight of the worker, the fall distance and the energy-absorbing characteristics of the fall arrest system, and because the lifeline is the last defense against a fall, OSHA requires that lifeline anchorages be capable of sustaining without failure an ultimate load of 22 kN per person. Using a design live load of 13.8 kN, when combined with a live load factor of 1.6, results in a total factored load of 22 kN, which matches OSHA's requirements for lifeline anchorages within an acceptable margin of error. The load is used to design the lifeline anchorage and the structural elements that support the anchorage.

1607.12 Reduction in uniform live loads. Except for uniform live loads at roofs, all other minimum uniformly distributed live loads,  \( L_{0} \) , in Table 1607.1 are permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1607.12.1 or 1607.12.2. Uniform live loads at roofs are permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1607.14.2.

Small floor areas are more likely to be subjected to the full uniform load than larger floor areas. Unloaded or lightly loaded areas tend to reduce the total load on the structural members supporting those floors. The specified uniformly distributed live loads from Table 1607.1 are permitted to be reduced, with some notable exceptions or limitations, in recognition that the larger the tributary area of a structural member, the lower the likelihood that the full live load will be realized.

1607.12.1 Basic uniform live load reduction. Subject to the limitations of Sections 1607.12.1.1 through 1607.12.1.3 and Table 1607.1, members for which a value of  \( K_{LL} A_{T} \)  is  \( 37 m^{2} \)  or more are permitted to be designed for a reduced

===== Page 1524 =====
uniformly distributed live load, L, in accordance with the following equation:

 \[ L=L_{o}\left(0.25+\frac{4.57}{\sqrt{K_{LL}A_{T}}}\right) \quad (16-6) \]

where:

L= Reduced design live load per  \( m^{2} \)  of area supported by the member.

 \( L_{o} = \text{Unreduced design live load per } m^{2} \text{ of area supported by the member (see Table 1607.1)} \) .

 \( K_{LL} = \text{Live load element factor (see Table 1607.12.1)} \) .

 \( A_{T}= \)  Tributary area, in  \( m^{2} \) .

L shall be not less than 0.50  \( L_{o} \)  for members supporting one floor and L shall be not less than 0.40  \( L_{o} \)  for members supporting two or more floors.

This section provides a method of reducing uniform floor live loads that is based on the provisions of SBC 301. The concept is that where the design live load is governed by the minimum live loads in Table 1607.1, the actual load on a large area of the floor is very likely to be less than the nominal live load in the table. Thus, the allowable reduction increases with the tributary area of the floor that is supported by a structural member; therefore, a girder that supports a large tributary area would be allowed to be designed for somewhat lower uniform live load than a floor beam that supports a smaller floor area.

The following example demonstrates the live load reduction calculation for the conditions shown in Commentary Figure 1607.12.1:

Solution:

For interior beam  \( K_{LL}=2 \)  (Table 1607.12.1)

 \[ K_{LL},A_{T}=(2)(69.16m^{2})=138.3m^{2} \]

Using Equation 16-6

 \[ L=L_{o}\left(0.25+\frac{4.57}{\sqrt{138.3}}\right)=2.5x\left(0.25+0.388\right) \]

 \[ L=1.6kN/m^{2} \]

 \[ 0.5L_{A}=1.25kN/m^{2}<1.6kN/m^{2} \]

Use reduced live load, L = 1.6 kN/m².

The purpose of this table is to provide tributary area adjustment factors,  \( K_{LL} \) , for determining live load reductions in Section 1607.12.1. The factor converts the tributary area of the structural member to an “influence area.” This “influence area” of a structural member is considered to be the adjacent floor area from which it derives any of its load. These adjustments to the tributary area range from 1 through 4 based on the type of structural element being designed and are meant to reflect the element’s ability to share load with adjacent elements.

1607.12.1.1 One-way slabs. The tributary area,  \( A_{T} \) , for use in Equation 16-6 for one-way slabs shall not exceed an area defined by the slab span times a width normal to the span of 1.5 times the slab span.

This section limits the tributary area that can be utilized to determine a live load reduction for one-way slabs.

1607.12.1.2 Heavy live loads. Live loads that exceed 5 kN/m \( ^{2} \)  shall not be reduced.

Exceptions:

1. The live loads for members supporting two or more floors are permitted to be reduced by a maximum of 20 percent, but the live load shall be not less than L as calculated in Section 1607.12.1.

2. For uses other than storage, where approved, additional live load reductions shall be permitted where shown by the registered design professional that a rational approach has been used and that such reductions are warranted.

The purpose of this section is to prohibit live load reductions where the live loads exceed  \( 5 \, kN/m^{2} \) . Such live loads are typically intended for storage or related purposes. It is more likely that the full live load will be realized at a given floor level for such occupancies. Thus, reduced live loads are not allowed for these conditions except as described in this section.

In Exception 1, the loads on structural members, such as columns and bearing walls that support two or more floors, are allowed to be reduced by 20 percent. Surveys have indicated that it is rare for the total live load on any story to exceed 80 percent of the tabulated uniform live loads. Conservatively, the full load should apply to beams and girders, but a member supporting multiple floors is allowed some live load reduction.

Recognizing that there are circumstances under which live loads exceed  \( 5 \, kN/m^{2} \)  in occupancies other than storage, Exception 2 allows the registered design professional to present a "rational" live load reduction proposal to be applied for members with larger tributary areas (e.g., girders, columns, foundations, etc.). Examples would be mechanical rooms, electrical rooms, process mezzanines in industrial buildings, etc. These types of areas may have very high localized uniform loads under the equipment footprints, for instance, but the live loads to members having larger tributary areas are much less, on average.

1607.12.1.3 Passenger vehicle garages. The live loads shall not be reduced in passenger vehicle garages.
Exception: The live loads for members supporting two or more floors are permitted to be reduced by a maximum of 20 percent, but the live load shall not be

===== Page 1525 =====
less than L as calculated in Section 1607.12.1.

This section limits the live load reduction for passenger vehicle garages to only those members that support more than two floors. Thus, floor framing members that support only a part of one floor do not warrant a reduction to the live load of  \( 2 \, kN/m^{2} \)  that is specified in Table 1607.1. The rationale for allowing some live load reduction for members supporting multiple floors is similar to that given under the exception in Section 1607.12.1.2.

1607.12.2 Alternative uniform live load reduction. As an alternative to Section 1607.12.1 and subject to the limitations of Table 1607.1, uniformly distributed live loads are permitted to be reduced in accordance with the following provisions. Such reductions shall apply to slab systems, beams, girders, columns, piers, walls and foundations.

1 A reduction shall not be permitted where the live load exceeds  \( 5 \, kN/m^{2} \)  except that the design live load for members supporting two or more floors is permitted to be reduced by a maximum of 20 percent.

2 A reduction shall not be permitted in passenger vehicle parking garages except that the live loads for members supporting two or more floors are permitted to be reduced by not greater than 20 percent.

3 For live loads not exceeding  \( 5 \, kN/m^{2} \) , the design live load for any structural member supporting  \( 14 \, m^{2} \)  or more is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Equation 16-7.

4 For one-way slabs, the area, A, for use in Equation 16-7 shall not exceed the product of the slab span and a width normal to the span of 0.5 times the slab span.

 \[ R=0.861(A-13.94) \quad (16-7) \]

5 Such reduction shall not exceed the smallest of:

1) 40 percent for members supporting one floor.

2) 60 percent for members supporting two or more floors.

3) R as determined by the following equation:
 \[  R = 23.1(1 + D / L_{o})  \]

(16-8)

where:

 \[ A = \text{Area of floor supported by the member, } m^2. \]

 \[ D = \text{Dead load per } m^2 \text{ of area supported.} \]

 \[ L_{o} = \text{Unreduced live load per } m^{2} \text{ of area supported.} \]

 \[ R = \text{Reduction in percent.} \]

This section includes an alternative floor live load method that is permitted to be used instead of the method indicated in Sections 1607.12.1 through 1607.12.1.3. The basis for this section is the 1997 UBC.

Where reductions are permitted, they are allowed at a rate of 0.861 percent per square meter of area in excess of  \( 14 \, m^{2} \) . This value cannot exceed 60 percent for members supporting two or more floors, such as columns and bearing walls below the top floor of a building or 40 percent for members supporting loads from just one floor or level, such as most slabs, beams and girders. Additionally, the reduction cannot be more than the value determined by Equation 16-8.

Example of an alternate floor live load reduction:

For beam G1 given in Figure 1607.12.1, determine the reduced floor live load in accordance with Section 1607.12.2.

Solution:

 \( A_{T}=69.16\ m^{2}>14\ m^{2} \) ; therefore, a reduction is permitted.

 \[ R=(0.861\%)(69.16-13.94)=47.5\%>40\% \quad Equation 16-7 \]

 \[ R=(23.1\%)(1+2.25/2.5)=43.9\%>40\% \quad Equation 16-8 \]

Use the maximum 40-percent reduction allowed for horizontal members.

 \[  Use L=2.5(1-0.4)=1.5kN/m^{2}. \]

1607.13 Distribution of floor loads. Where uniform floor live loads are involved in the design of structural members arranged so as to create continuity, the minimum applied loads shall be the full dead loads on all spans in combination with the floor live loads on spans selected to produce the greatest load effect at each location under consideration. Floor live loads are permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1607.12.

For continuous floor members loaded such that the live loads of a building are distributed in some bays and not in others, some of the structural elements will be subjected to greater stresses because of partial loading conditions as compared to full loading on all spans. This code section requires the engineer to consider partial loadings that produce the greatest design forces for any location in the design of continuous floor elements.

For example, Commentary Figure 1607.14.1 shows a continuous multispan girder with partial loading. The Type I loading condition, in which only the alternate spans have uniform live loads, produces:

• Maximum positive moments at the centers of the loaded spans (A-B, C-D, E-F).

• Maximum negative moments at the centers of the unloaded spans (B-C, D-E, F-G).

===== Page 1526 =====
The Type II live load distribution which contains two loaded adjacent spans with alternate spans loaded thereafter, produces:

• Maximum negative moment at Support D.

• Maximum girder shears.

To obtain the maximum total stresses imposed on the girder, the dead load moments and shears must be added to those produced by the partial live loadings.

1607.14 Roof loads. The structural supports of roofs and marquees shall be designed to resist wind and earthquake loads, in addition to the dead load of construction and the appropriate live loads as prescribed in this section, or as set forth in Table 1607.1. The live loads acting on a sloping surface shall be assumed to act vertically on the horizontal projection of that surface.

In addition to dead and live loads, the roofs structural system is to be designed and constructed to resist environmental loads caused by wind, and earthquakes. According to the definition of "Live load, roof" in Section 202, such loads are typically produced by maintenance of the roof and rooftop equipment. Other roof live loads must be considered where appropriate, such as "occupiable roofs" (see Section 1607.14.2.2) where an occupancy-related live load would be applicable.

1607.14.1 Distribution of roof loads. Where uniform roof live loads are reduced to less than  \( 1 kN/m^{2} \)  in accordance with Section 1607.14.2.1 and are applied to the design of structural members arranged so as to create continuity, the reduced roof live load shall be applied to adjacent spans or to alternate spans, whichever produces the most unfavorable load effect. See Section 1607.14.2 for reductions in minimum roof live loads.

For continuous roof construction, where live loads are reduced to less than  \( 1 \, kN/m^{2} \)  as permitted in Section 1607.14.2.1, partial loadings must be included in the design of structural elements to determine the governing loading situation. For example, Commentary Figure 1607.14.1 shows a continuous multispan girder with partial loading. The Type I loading condition shows that only the alternate spans have uniform live loads, which produces:

• Maximum positive moments at the centers of the loaded spans (A-B, C-D, E-F).

• Maximum negative moments at the centers of the unloaded spans (B-C, D-E, F-G).

The Type II live load distribution shows two loaded adjacent spans with alternate spans loaded beyond these, which produces:
• Maximum negative moment at Support D.

• Maximum girder shears.

To obtain the maximum total stresses imposed on the girder, the dead load moments and shears must be added to those produced by the partial live loadings.

1607.14.2 Reduction in uniform roof live loads. The minimum uniformly distributed live loads of roofs and marquees,  \( L_{o} \) , in Table 1607.1 are permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1607.14.2.1.

The minimum roof live loads typically reflect loads that occur during roof maintenance, construction or repair. In addition to the standard roof live load of  \( 1 \, kN/m^{2} \) , Table 1607.1 includes roof live loads for special purpose roofs and fabric awnings. While this section seems to refer to reducing any of the tabulated uniformly distributed live loads, the actual reduction method provided in Section 1607.14.2.1 is limited to the  \( 1 \, kN/m^{2} \)  live load. This is made evident by the limits on Equation 16-9 of  \( 0.6 \leq L_{r} \leq 1 \) .

1607.14.2.1 Ordinary roofs, awnings and canopies. Ordinary flat, pitched and curved roofs, and awnings and canopies other than of fabric construction supported by a skeleton structure, are permitted to be designed for a reduced uniformly distributed roof live load,  \( L_{r} \) , as specified in the following equations or other controlling combinations of loads as specified in Section 1605, whichever produces the greater load effect.

In structures such as greenhouses, where special scaffolding is used as a work surface for workers and materials during maintenance and repair operations, a lower roof load than specified in the following equations shall not be used unless approved by the building official. Such structures shall be designed for a minimum roof live load of  \( 0.6kN/m^{2} \) .

 \[ L_{r}=L_{o}R_{1}R_{2} \quad (16-9) \]

where:  \( 0.6 \leq L_{r} \leq 1 \)

 \( L_{o}= \)  Unreduced roof live load per  \( m^{2} \)  of horizontal projection supported by the member (see Table 1607.1).

 \( L_{r} \)  = Reduced roof live load per  \( m^{2} \)  of horizontal projection supported by the member.

The reduction factors  \( R_{1} \)  and  \( R_{2} \)  shall be determined as follows:

 \[ R_{1}=1for A_{T}\leq18m^{2} \quad (16-10) \]

 \[ \begin{aligned}R_{1}=1.2-0.011A_{T}\\ for18m^{2}<A_{T}<54m^{2}\end{aligned} \quad (16-11) \]

 \[ R_{1}=0.6for A_{T}\geq54m^{2} \quad (16-12) \]

===== Page 1527 =====
where:

 \( A_{T} \)  = Tributary area (span length multiplied by effective width) in  \( m^{2} \)  supported by the member, and

 \[ R_{2}=1for F\leq4 \quad (16-13) \]

 \[ R_{2}=1.2-0.05F \quad (16-14) \]

 \[ \begin{aligned}&for4<F<12\\ &\quad R_{2}=0.6for F\geq12\\ \end{aligned} \quad (16-15) \]

where:

F = For a sloped roof, 0.12 × slope, with slope expressed as a percentage, or for an arch or dome, the rise-to-span ratio multiplied by 32.

This section provides a formula for the determination of the live load for the design of flat, pitched or curved roofs. The live load from Table 1607.1 that applies is  \( 1 \, kN/m^2 \) . Reduced roof live loads are based on the roof slope and the tributary area of the member being considered. The portion of the live load reduction based on tributary area does not apply to roof members that support small tributary areas of less than  \( 18 \, m^2 \) . The load can be reduced as the tributary area increases but never to less than  \( 0.6 \, kN/m^2 \) . For roof slopes between 4:12 and 12:12, live load reductions based on slope apply. Commentary Figure 1607.14.2.1 shows the roof live load,  \( L_r \) , determined by Equation 16-9 for increments of roof slope. Since the relationship of variables is linear, intermediate values can be interpolated from the figure.

This section also provides for a lower roof live load for a greenhouse, since it is not likely that loads from maintenance or repair will exceed the specified  \( 0.6 \, kN/m^{2} \) .

1607.14.2.2 Occupiable roofs. Areas of roofs that are occupiable, such as vegetative roofs, landscaped roofs or for assembly or other similar purposes, and marquees are permitted to have their uniformly distributed live loads reduced in accordance with Section 1607.12.

Most roofs are considered to be unoccupiable, meaning that while maintenance personnel may be present on occasion, the general public does not have access to the area. Therefore, the design live loads for most roofs are generally low [e.g.,  \( 1 \, kN/m^2 \)  reducible live load]. Roofs that are occupied or accessible by the public are designed for larger loads. Live loads for roof gardens may be reduced per Section 1607.12. Live loads for assembly areas may not be reduced, except as described in the limited exceptions to Section 1607.12. The distinction between roof gardens and assembly areas is based on the likelihood that a large number of people will congregate on the roof. Roof gardens are landscaped areas where assembly use is not anticipated, such as a promenade deck located on the main roof of an apartment building. Roofs that are used for assembly purposes have the same live load requirements as any other similar assembly area.

1607.14.3 Awnings and canopies. Awnings and canopies shall be designed for uniform live loads as required in Table 1607.1 as well as for wind loads as specified in Section 1609.

Awning structures are lightweight frames that are typically covered with fabric materials and are designed to sustain a live load of 0.25  \( kN/m^{2} \) , and wind loads of Section 1609. The live load and wind load are to be combined according to Section 1605.

1607.14.4 Photovoltaic panel systems. Roof structures that provide support for photovoltaic panel systems shall be designed in accordance with Sections 1607.14.4.1 through 1607.14.4.5, as applicable.

Photovoltaic (PV) panel systems, also known as “solar panels,” are required to be designed to resist the live loads in this section.

1607.14.4.1 Roof live load. Roof structures that support photovoltaic panel systems shall be designed to resist each of the following conditions:

1 Applicable uniform and concentrated roof loads with the photovoltaic panel system dead loads.

Exception: Roof live loads need not be applied to the area covered by photovoltaic panels where the clear space between the panels and the roof surface is 600 mm or less.

2 Applicable uniform and concentrated roof loads without the photovoltaic panel system present.

PV panels can affect where live loads occur or are placed on the roof. The intent is for two design conditions to be checked: 1. Assuming that the panels are not present; and 2. Assuming that the panels are present. The first analysis addresses cases where panels are anticipated to be installed but for some reason end up being omitted, or where the panels are initially installed but are removed at some point in the building's life. In the second analysis, live load may be omitted in areas where the clear space under the panels is 600 mm or less, which is considered inaccessible. Live load should be applied to all accessible areas, including roof surfaces not covered by panels.

1607.14.4.2 Photovoltaic panels or modules. The structure of a roof that supports solar photovoltaic panels or modules shall be designed to accommodate the full solar photovoltaic panels or modules and ballast dead load, including

===== Page 1528 =====
concentrated loads from support frames in combination with the loads from Section 1607.14.4.1 and other applicable loads.

The effects of concentrated loads from the support frames, including ballast, must be considered.

1607.14.4.3 Photovoltaic panels installed on open grid roof structures. Structures with open grid framing and without a roof deck or sheathing supporting photovoltaic panel systems shall be designed to support the uniform and concentrated roof live loads specified in Section 1607.14.4.1, except that the uniform roof live load shall be permitted to be reduced to 0.57 kN/m².

Engineers have made various assumptions relating to the vertical support of rooftop PV systems particularly at existing structures where reserve vertical capacity is often limited. Among those assumptions is whether to consider full, partial or no roof live loads at areas covered by new PV systems. This issue has been studied by a Live Load Task Group under the directive of the Structural Engineers Association of California (SEAOC) Solar PV System Subcommittee. Its recommendation led to a proposal that has been finalized and accepted into SBC 301.

1607.14.4.4 Ground-mounted photovoltaic (PV) panel systems. Ground-mounted photovoltaic (PV) panel systems that are independent structures and do not have accessible/occupied space underneath are not required to accommodate a roof photovoltaic live load. Other loads and combinations in accordance with Section 1605 shall be accommodated.

Ground-mounted photovoltaic (PV) panel systems are not required to be designed for roof live loads if the space under them is inaccessible.

1607.14.4.5 Ballasted photovoltaic panel systems. Roof structures that provide support for ballasted photovoltaic panel systems shall be designed, or analyzed, in accordance with Section 1604.4; checked in accordance with Section 1604.3.6 for deflections; and checked in accordance with Section 1611 for ponding.

Although the design of all roof members is required to consider deflection and ponding, as are all roof members that support unballasted PV panels, given the weight of typical ballasted PV systems it was believed appropriate to reinforce the fact that roof members supporting such systems must be analyzed for deflection and ponding as well as meet minimum capacity requirements.

1607.15 Crane loads. The crane live load shall be the rated capacity of the crane. Design loads for the runway beams, including connections and support brackets, of moving bridge cranes and monorail cranes shall include the maximum wheel loads of the crane and the vertical impact, lateral and longitudinal forces induced by the moving crane.

This section provides a general description of the crane loads that are required to be included in the design. The supporting structure for the crane is to be designed for a combination of the maximum wheel load, vertical impact and horizontal load as a simultaneous load combination. The typical arrangement for a top-running bridge crane is shown in Commentary Figure 1607.15.

1607.15.1 Maximum wheel load. The maximum wheel loads shall be the wheel loads produced by the weight of the bridge, as applicable, plus the sum of the rated capacity and the weight of the trolley with the trolley positioned on its runway at the location where the resulting load effect is maximum.

The maximum vertical wheel load occurs when the trolley is moved as close as possible to the supporting beams under consideration. This results in the greatest portion of the crane weight, the design weight lifted load and the wheel vertical impact load on the supporting beams.

1607.15.2 Vertical impact force. The maximum wheel loads of the crane shall be increased by the following percentages to account for the effects of vertical impact or vibration:

Monorail cranes (powered) 25 percent
Cab-operated or remotely operated 25 percent
bridge cranes (powered)

Pendant-operated bridge cranes \( ^{10} \)  (powered)

Bridge cranes or monorail cranes with hand-geared bridge, trolley and/or percent hoist

It is necessary to account for the effects of vertical impact or vibration from the movement of the suspended weight from the crane and from the movement of the crane along the rails.

1607.15.3 Lateral force. The lateral force on crane runway beams with electrically powered trolleys shall be calculated as 20 percent of the sum of the rated capacity of the crane and the weight of the hoist and trolley. The lateral force shall be assumed to act horizontally at the traction surface of a runway beam, in either direction perpendicular to the beam, and shall be distributed with due regard to the lateral stiffness of the runway beam and supporting structure.

This section is necessary to define the design lateral force on the crane supports. Lateral

===== Page 1529 =====
force, or force applied at a right angle, to the crane rail is caused by the lateral movement of the lifted load and from the frame action of the crane.

1607.15.4 Longitudinal force. The longitudinal force on crane runway beams, except for bridge cranes with hand-geared bridges, shall be calculated as 10 percent of the maximum wheel loads of the crane. The longitudinal force shall be assumed to act horizontally at the traction surface of a run-way beam, in either direction parallel to the beam.

This section is needed to define the longitudinal force on the crane supports, which is caused from the longitudinal motion of the crane with the lifted load.

1607.16 Interior walls and partitions. Interior walls and partitions that exceed 1.8 m in height, including their finish materials, shall have adequate strength and stiffness to resist the loads to which they are subjected but not less than a horizontal load of  \( 0.25 \, kN/m^{2} \) .

The minimum lateral live load is intended to provide sufficient strength and durability of the wall framing and of the finished construction to provide a minimum level of resistance to nominal impact loads that commonly occur in the use of a facility, such as impacts from moving furniture or equipment, as well as to resist heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) pressurization.

1607.16.1 Fabric partitions. Fabric partitions that exceed 1.8 m in height, including their finish materials, shall have adequate strength and stiffness to resist the following load conditions:

1 The horizontal distributed load need only be applied to the partition framing. The total area used to determine the distributed load shall be the area of the fabric face between the framing members to which the fabric is attached. The total distributed load shall be uniformly applied to such framing members in proportion to the length of each member.

2 A concentrated load of 0.2 kN applied to a 200 mm-diameter area [31415 mm \( ^{2} \) ] of the fabric face at a height of 1.4 m above the floor.

This section provides criteria for fabric partitions (see definition, Section 202) as an alternative to Section 1607.15. The construction of these partitions is unique, which makes it difficult to meet the full requirements of Section 1607.16. Condition 1 requires the partition framing to be capable of resisting a minimum lateral load. Condition 2 approximates the load of a person leaning against the fabric using their hand as the point of contact. This criterion is based on test standards that are used to evaluate the tip-over resistance of office furniture panel systems that are often used to provide open plan offices.

1607.16.2 Fire walls. In order to meet the structural stability requirements of Section 706.2 where the structure on either side of the wall has collapsed, fire walls and their supports shall be designed to withstand a minimum horizontal allowable stress load of  \( 0.25 \, kN/m^{2} \) .

This section specifies the minimum lateral loading that fire walls are required to resist to meet the structural stability requirements of Section 706.2 where the structure on either side of the wall has collapsed and can no longer provide lateral support. This is the same lateral load that is required for fire walls designed per NFPA 221, which is deemed to meet the requirements of Section 706.2.

1607.17 Fixed ladders. Fixed ladders with rungs shall be designed to resist a single concentrated load of 1.35 kN in accordance with Section 4.5.4 of SBC 301. Where rails of fixed ladders extend above a floor or platform at the top of the ladder, each side rail extension shall be designed to resist a single concentrated load of 0.45 kN in accordance with Section 4.5.4 of SBC 301. Ship's ladders shall be designed to resist the stair loads given in Table 1607.1.

A fixed ladder is a ladder, including individual rung ladders, permanently attached to a structure or building. See the commentary to Section 1607.1.

1607.18 Library stack rooms. The live loading indicated in Table 1607.1 for library stack rooms applies to stack room floors that support nonmobile, double-faced library book stacks, subject to the following limitations:

1 The nominal book stack unit height shall not exceed 2250 mm.

2 The nominal shelf depth shall not exceed 300 mm for each face.

3 Parallel rows of double-faced book stacks shall be separated by aisles not less than 900 mm in width.

For a library stack room, if the limitations noted are exceeded, then the design loading could exceed the minimum values provided in Table 1607.1. See the commentary to Section 1607.1.

1607.19 Seating for assembly uses. Bleachers, folding and telescopic seating and grandstands shall be designed for the loads specified in ICC 300. Stadiums and arenas with fixed seats shall be designed for the horizontal sway loads in Section 1607.19.1.

===== Page 1530 =====
The reference to ICC 300 addresses the design of bleachers, folding and telescopic seating and grandstands. Section 1607.19.1 provides for the horizontal sway forces to be applied to each row of seats for the design of stadiums and arenas with fixed seats. See the commentary to Section 1607.1.

1607.19.1 Horizontal sway loads. The design of stadiums and arenas with fixed seats shall include horizontal swaying forces applied to each row of seats as follows:

1 0.35 kN/m of seat applied in a direction parallel to each row of seats.

2 0.15 kN/m of seat applied in a direction perpendicular to each row of seats.

The parallel and perpendicular horizontal swaying forces are not required to be applied simultaneously.

See the commentary to Section 1607.19.
1607.20 Sidewalks, vehicular driveways, and yards subject to trucking. The live loading indicated in Table 1607.1 for sidewalks, vehicular driveways, and yards subject to trucking shall comply with the requirements of this section.

See the commentary to Section 1607.1.

1607.20.1 Uniform loads. In addition to the loads indicated in Table 1607.1, other uniform loads in accordance with an approved method that contains provisions for truck loading shall be considered where appropriate.

See the commentary to Section 1607.1.
1607.20.2 Concentrated loads. The concentrated wheel load indicated in Table 1607.1 shall be applied on an area of 115 mm by 115 mm.

Concentrated wheel loads are the fundamental loads at the actual wheel-slab contact points. For structural analyses, it is assumed that the wheel load is uniformly applied over a square contact area 115 mm by 115 mm. See the commentary to Section 1607.1.

1607.21 Stair treads. The concentrated load indicated in Table 1607.1 for stair treads shall be applied on an area of 50 mm by 50 mm. This load need not be assumed to act concurrently with the uniform load.

The structural design of a stair tread must consider the effects of imposed uniform and concentrated loads. The uniform load and the concentrated load need not be assumed to act concurrently. See the commentary to Section 1607.1.

1607.22 Residential attics. The live loads indicated in Table 1607.1 for attics in residential occupancies shall comply with the requirements of this section.

The live loads indicated in Table 1607.1 for residential attics additionally references this section. Table 1607.1 specifies minimum uniform live load in residential one- and two-family dwelling attics for three distinct conditions: uninhabitable attics without storage, uninhabitable attics with storage, and habitable attics and sleeping areas. Commentary Figure 1607.22 summarizes the uniform live loads that apply to residential attics based on the criteria contained in Table 1607.1 and Section 1607.22.

One noteworthy distinction made by Section 1607.22.3 is that any uninhabitable attic that is served by a stairway (other than a pull-down type) must be designed using the load of 1.45 kN/m² that is applicable to habitable attics. The implication is that the presence of a stairway is more conducive for the attic access and therefore warrants a greater design live load. This recognizes that the stairway is likely to serve an attic with greater headroom. For an attic that is accessed by other means, such as a framed opening or pull-down stairs, it is necessary to determine whether the attic storage load applies in accordance with the Section 1607.22.2.

Historically, a minimum load of 0.50 kN/m² has been viewed as appropriate where occasional access to the attic is anticipated for maintenance purposes, but significant storage is restricted by physical constraints, such as low clearance or the configuration of truss webs. It provides a minimum degree of structural integrity, allowing for occasional access to an attic space for maintenance purposes. Allowing the application of this load to be independent of other live loads is deemed appropriate, since it would be rare for this load and other maximum live loads to occur at once.

1607.22.1 Uninhabitable attics without storage. In residential occupancies, uninhabitable attic areas without storage are those where the maximum clear height between the joists and rafters is less than 1050 mm, or where there are not two or more adjacent trusses with web configurations capable of accommodating an assumed rectangle 1050 mm in height by 600 mm in width, or greater, within the plane of the trusses. The live load in Table 1607.1 need not be assumed to act concurrently with any other live load requirement.

See the commentary to Section 1607.22.
1607.22.2 Uninhabitable attics with storage. In residential occupancies, uninhabitable attic areas with storage are those where the maximum clear height between the joist and rafter is 1050 mm or greater, or where there are two or more adjacent trusses with web configurations capable of accommodating an assumed rectangle 1050 mm in height by 600 mm in width, or greater,

===== Page 1531 =====
within the plane of the trusses. The live load in Table 1607.1 need only be applied to those portions of the joists or truss bottom chords where both of the following conditions are met:

1 The attic area is accessed from an opening not less than 500 mm in width by 750 mm in length that is located where the clear height in the attic is not less than 750 mm.

2 The slope of the joists or truss bottom chords is not greater than 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal.
The remaining portions of the joists or truss bottom chords shall be designed for a uniformly distributed concurrent live load of not less than 0.50 kN/m \( ^{2} \) .

See the commentary to Section 1607.22.
1607.22.3 Attics served by stairs. Attic spaces served by stairways other than the pull-down type shall be designed to support the minimum live load specified for habitable attics and sleeping rooms.

See the commentary to Section 1607.22.

## SECTION 1608 SNOW LOADS

1608.1 General. Snow load is inapplicable to KSA.

## SECTION 1609 WIND LOADS

1609.1 Applications. Buildings, structures and parts thereof shall be designed to withstand the minimum wind loads prescribed herein. Decreases in wind loads shall not be made for the effect of shielding by other structures.
The determination of the wind load, W, must be in accordance with Section 1609. This section is intended to provide minimum criteria for the design and construction of buildings and other structures to resist wind loads. These regulations serve to reduce the potential for damage to property caused by windstorms and to provide an acceptable level of protection to building occupants. The objectives also include the safety of people in the immediate vicinity and the prevention of damage to adjacent properties because of the possible detachment of major building components (e.g., walls, roofs, etc.), structural collapse or flying debris. The criteria for wind design given in this section of the code generally reflect the wind load provisions of SBC 301. For a better understanding of the wind load provisions, it is important to have a fundamental knowledge of the effects of high-velocity wind forces on buildings and other structures. Wind/structure interactions can be characterized as follows:

When wind encounters a stationary object, such as a building, the airflow changes direction and produces several effects on the building that are illustrated in Commentary Figure 1609.1(1). Exterior walls and other vertical surfaces facing the wind (windward side) and perpendicular to its path are subjected to inward (positive) pressures. However, wind does not stop on contact with a facing surface, but flows around and over the building surfaces. This airflow does not instantaneously change directions at surface discontinuities, such as corners of walls or eaves, or over ridges and roof corners. Instead it separates from the downwind surfaces due to high turbulence and localized pressures, resulting in outward (negative) pressures. This phenomena produces suction or outward pressures (negative) on the sidewalls, leeward wall and, depending on geometry, the roof.

Commentary Figure 1609.1(1) shows a flat roof and the resulting negative pressures caused by external wind; however, pressures may differ on sloping roofs in the direction perpendicular to the ridge. Roof surfaces (on the windward side) with shallow slopes are generally subjected to outward (negative) pressures—the same as flat roofs. Moderately sloping roofs (about 30 degrees) may be subjected to inward (positive) pressures, outward (negative) pressures or both—negative pressure in the lower part of the roof and positive pressure in the area of the ridge. However, the code does not require consideration of this scenario. High-sloping roofs (windward side) respond similar to walls and sustain positive wind pressures. The leeward side of a sloped roof is subjected to negative pressure, regardless of the angle. When the wind acts parallel to the ridge, the pressures on a sloped roof are similar to the pressures on a flat roof, meaning the roof is subject to negative pressures.

Openings in the building envelope can impact the magnitude of wind pressure on a structure by increasing the internal pressures that, in turn, will affect the net pressures on the structure. Commentary Figure 1609.1(2) illustrates the effects of openings in a building's exterior walls. An opening in the leeward wall causes negative pressure on the interior, increasing the total load on the windward wall. Openings on the windward wall cause positive internal pressure against all the walls from the interior of the building. As the figure shows, the result is an increase in the total load on the leeward wall. In extreme cases, failures resulting from this type of wind flow appear as if the building has exploded.

The definition of “Openings” is worth noting, since in the nonstructural code provisions the term “openings” typically refers to doors, ducts or windows. The definition of “Openings” that is relevant to wind load is in Section 26.2 of SBC 301. They are all described as “apertures or holes in the building envelope that allow air to

===== Page 1532 =====
flow through the building envelope and that are designed as 'open' during design wind loads.' Such openings are then considered in classifying the building as enclosed, partially enclosed or open. The wind load considerations will differ based on that classification.

1609.1.1 Determination of wind loads. Wind loads on every building or structure shall be determined in accordance with Chapters 26 to 30 of SBC 301. The type of opening protection required, the basic design wind speed, V, and the exposure category for a site is permitted to be determined in accordance with Section 1609 or SBC 301. Wind shall be assumed to come from any horizontal direction and wind pressures shall be assumed to act normal to the surface considered.

Exceptions:

1. Subject to the limitations of Section 1609.1.1.1, the provisions of ICC 600 shall be permitted for applicable Group R-2 and R-3 buildings.

2. Subject to the limitations of Section 1609.1.1.1, residential structures using the provisions of AWC WFCM.

3. Subject to the limitations of Section 1609.1.1.1, residential structures using the provisions of AISI S230.

4. Designs using NAAMM FP 1001.

5. Designs using TIA-222 for antennas supporting structures and antennas, provided the horizontal extent of Topographic Category 2 escarpments in Section 2.6.6.2 of TIA-222 shall be 16 times the height of the escarpment.

6. Wind tunnel tests in accordance with ASCE 49 and Sections 31.4 and 31.5 of SBC 301.

The wind speeds in Figure 1609.3(1) through Figure 1609.3(4) are basic design wind speeds, V, and shall be converted in accordance with Section 1609.3.1 to allowable stress design wind speeds,  \( V_{asd} \) , when the provisions of the standards referenced in Exceptions 4 and 5 are used.

Section 1609 is intended to require that buildings and structures be designed and constructed to resist the wind loads quantified in Chapters 26 through 30 of SBC 301.

There are six exceptions to using the provisions of SBC 301 for the determination of wind loads.

Exception 1 provides for the use of ICC 600 for Group R-2 and R-3 buildings where they are located within Exposure B or C as defined in Section 1609.4 and not sited on the upper half of an isolated hill, escarpment or ridge with the characteristics described in Section 1609.1.1.1. ICC 600 has prescriptive construction requirements and required load capacity tables that replace the requirement for structural analysis, which is intended to provide improved design construction details to achieve greater structural performance for single- and multiple-family dwellings in a high-wind event (see ICC 600 for other detailed application limitations). Exception 2 provides for the use of the AWC Wood Frame Construction Manual for One- and Two-family Dwellings where the building is sited within Exposure B or C as defined in Section 1609.4 and not on the upper half of an isolated hill, escarpment or ridge with the characteristics described in Section 1609.1.1.1.

The AWC Wood Frame Construction Manual for One- and Two-family Dwellings has prescriptive construction requirements and required load-resistance tables that replace the requirement for structural analysis. The tabulated engineered and prescriptive design provisions apply to one- and two-family wood frame dwellings where the basic wind speed is between 40 and 54 m/s. See Table 1609.3.1 for conversion between nominal and basic wind speeds (see the AWC Wood Frame Construction Manual for One- and Two-family Dwellings, Chapter 1, for other detailed application limitations). Similarly, Exception 3 allows the cold-formed steel prescriptive standard for one- and two-family dwellings.

Exception 4 simply refers to a standard dealing specifically with the design of flag poles.

Exception 5 allows the use of TIA 222-G for antennas and their supporting structures. This standard provides a simplification of the topographic wind speed-up effect. The TIA 222-G standard allows a designer to use the full topographic wind speed-up method of SBC 301 in order to avoid the conservatism of the simplified method. A code modification makes sure that the simplified method is safe in all cases.

TIA 222-G accounts for the worst-case wind speed-up at the crest for a steep slope but overlooks the fact that less-sloped escarpments create pressure increases that cannot be safely ignored beyond the "steep slope" influence. As written, the standard stops considering the topographic wind speed-up effect at "8 times the height" from the crest. At this distance, a shallow slope can still increase wind pressure by more than 20 percent.

The modification changes “8 times the height” in the standard to “16 times the height.” The intent is that the “Topographic category 2” definition in TIA 222-G should be applied as follows:

Category 2. Structures located at or near the crest of an escarpment. Wind speed-up shall

===== Page 1533 =====
be considered to occur in all directions. Structures located vertically on the lower half of an escarpment or horizontally beyond 16 times the height of the escarpment from its crest, shall be permitted to be considered as Topographic Category 1.

1609.1.1.1 Applicability. The provisions of ICC 600 are applicable only to buildings located within Exposure B or C as defined in Section 1609.4. The provisions of ICC 600, AWC WFCM and AISI S230 shall not apply to buildings sited on the upper half of an isolated hill, ridge or escarpment meeting the following conditions:

1 The hill, ridge or escarpment is 18 m or higher if located in Exposure B or 9 m or higher if located in Exposure C.

2 The maximum average slope of the hill exceeds 10 percent.

3 The hill, ridge or escarpment is unobstructed upwind by other such topographic features for a distance from the high point of 50 times the height of the hill or 1.6 km, whichever is greater.

This section places limitations on the use of ICC 600 and the AWC Wood Frame Construction Manual for One- and Two-family Dwellings. Neither of these standards accounts for the effect of isolated hills, ridges or escarpments. As illustrated in Commentary Figure 1609.1.1.1, the wind speed increases when a mass of air passes over those terrain features. This phenomenon is referred to as the "wind speed-up" effect and requires the use of SBC 301.

1609.2 Protection of openings. In wind-borne debris regions, glazing in buildings shall be impact resistant or protected with an impact-resistant covering meeting the requirements of an approved impact-resistant standard or ASTM E1996 and ASTM E1886 referenced herein as follows:

1 Glazed openings located within 9 m of grade shall meet the requirements of the large missile test of ASTM E1996.

2 Glazed openings located more than 9 m above grade shall meet the provisions of the small missile test of ASTM E1996.

Exceptions:

1. Glazing in Risk Category I buildings, including greenhouses that are occupied for growing plants on a production or research basis, without public access shall be permitted to be unprotected.

2. Glazing in Risk Category II, III or IV buildings located over 18 m above the ground and over 9 m above aggregate surface roofs located within 450 m of the building shall be permitted to be unprotected.

The purpose of this section is to address risks associated with wind-borne debris in high-wind areas. See the definitions of "Wind-borne debris region" in Section 202 for an explanation of where these provisions apply. This section requires protection of glazed openings in buildings in wind-borne debris regions. This can be provided in the form of a protective assembly that is impact tested or by using impact-resistant glazing.

During a hurricane, buildings are impacted from wind-borne debris due to high-velocity winds. This debris can impact the glazing, causing breakage and creating an opening within the building envelope. The presence of openings in the building envelope can have a significant effect on the magnitude of the total wind pressure required to be resisted by each structural element of a building. Depending on the location of these openings with respect to wind direction and the amount of background porosity, external and internal pressures may act in the same direction to produce higher forces on some walls and the roof. An example of this is shown in Commentary Figure 1609.2. In this scenario, as the wind flows over the building, pressures are developed on the external surface, as shown. Introduction of an opening in the windward wall causes the wind to rush into the building, exerting internal pressures (positive) against all interior surfaces. This type of opening has the net effect of producing potentially high internal pressures that will act in the same direction as the external pressures on the roof, side and leeward walls. Considering the high probability of wind-borne debris during a hurricane and the effect of an unintended opening in the building envelope, the code requires glazing in designated regions to be protected.

Where wind-borne debris protection is provided, the section specifies two types of tests to demonstrate adequate resistance: the large missile test to simulate large debris up to 9 m above grade and the small missile test to simulate smaller debris up to 18 m above grade, both of which are common during very high winds. An example of small debris is gravel from the surrounding area that becomes air borne.

Impact-resistant coverings or glazing must meet the test requirements of an approved impact standard or ASTM E1886 and ASTM E1996. ASTM E1886 and ASTM E1996 work together with the standard test method (E1886) and the test specification (E1996), including scoping, technical requirements and pass/fail criteria.

===== Page 1534 =====
Exception 1 exempts low-hazard (Risk Category I) buildings from this requirement for protecting openings against wind-borne debris. Exception 2 exempts openings in buildings that are classified in Risk Category II, III or IV where the opening locations meet the stated conditions.

1609.2.1 Louvers. Louvers protecting intake and exhaust ventilation ducts not assumed to be open that are located within 9 m of grade shall meet the requirements of AMCA 540.

This section provides direction for impact testing of louvers that cover intake or exhaust duct openings in wind-borne debris regions. Louvers often have blades or slats affixed to and covering an opening in the exterior envelope, making them similar to certain types of porous shutters used to protect glazed openings. When a louver in an exterior wall is damaged by wind-borne debris during a high-wind event, the air-leakage-rated damper inside the ventilation duct may also be exposed to damage.

The scope of ASTM E1996 covers impact testing of exterior building features, such as windows, glazed curtain walls, doors and storm shutters, in buildings located in geographic regions that are prone to hurricanes, simulating impact by both large and small missiles. For glazed openings and nonporous shutters that protect the fenestration assembly, the impact testing is followed by a cyclic loading test. There is no specific provision in the standard for testing louvers that cover ventilation openings, either for impact or air pressure cycling. Nevertheless, in the absence of an appropriate specification and test method for louvers, some jurisdictions have based their product approvals on the performance criteria of the large missile test of ASTM E1886 and ASTM E1996. The Air Movement Control Association (AMCA) has developed a standard specification for louvers that provides a uniform set of guidelines and a consistent basis for evaluating the ability of the louver to maintain its integrity during the large missile test of ASTM E1886 and ASTM E1996.

1609.2.2 Reserved for numbering.

1609.2.3 Garage doors. Garage door glazed opening protection for wind-borne debris shall meet the requirements of an approved impact-resisting standard or ANSI/DASMA 115.

This provision references a standard for the wind-borne debris resistance testing of glazing installed in garage doors. Because ASTM E1886 and ASTM E1996 require interpretation regarding their application to garage doors, DASMA 115 is the primary standard referenced for this purpose.
1609.3 Basic design wind speed. The basic design wind speed, V, in m/s, for the determination of the wind loads shall be determined by Figure 1609.3(1) through and Figure 1609.3(4). The basic design wind speed, V, for use in the design of Risk Category II buildings and structures shall be obtained from Figure 1609.3(1). The basic design wind speed, V, for use in the design of Risk Category III buildings and structures shall be obtained from Figure 1609.3(2). The basic design wind speed, V, for use in the design of Risk Category IV buildings and structures shall be obtained from Figure 1609.3(3). The basic design wind speed, V, for use in the design of Risk Category IV buildings and structures shall be obtained from Figure 1609.3(4). Mountainous terrain, gorges, and special wind regions (if identified by authority) shall be examined for unusual wind conditions. The building official shall, if necessary, adjust the values to account for higher local wind speeds. Such adjustment shall be based on meteorological information and an estimate of the basic design wind speed obtained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26 of SBC 301.

This section establishes the wind speed that is to be used for design. basic design wind speed maps identify special wind regions where speeds vary substantially within a very short distance due to topographic effects, such as mountains and valleys. This section specifies appropriate recurrence interval criteria to be used for estimating the basic design wind speeds from regional climatic data in other than hurricane-prone regions. See Section 26.5.3 of SBC 301 for issues to be addressed in the data analysis and the associated commentary for further details [also see the commentary to Figure 1609.3(1) through Figure 1609.3(4)].

1609.3.1 Wind speed conversion. Where required, the basic design wind speeds of Figure 1609.3(1) through Figure 1609.3(4) shall be converted to allowable stress design wind speeds,  \( V_{asd} \) , using Table 1609.3.1 or Equation 16-16.

 \[ V_{asd}=V\sqrt{0.6} \quad (16-16) \]

Where:
 \( V_{asd} \)  = Allowable stress design wind speed applicable to methods specified in Exceptions 4 and 5 of Section 1609.1.1.

V = Basic design wind speeds determined from Figure 1609.3(1) through Figure 1609.3(4).

Because many code provisions are driven by wind speed, it is necessary to include a mechanism that provides a comparable wind speed so that the provisions triggered by wind speed are not affected. The terms “basic

===== Page 1535 =====
design wind speed" and "allowable stress design wind speed" have been incorporated in numerous locations to help the code user distinguish between them.

See Table 1609.3.1

The table converts the mapped basic wind speed to allowable stress design wind speed,  \( V_{sad} \) , for use where necessary, such as in the standards that are referenced in 1609.1.1.

1609.4 Exposure category. For each wind direction considered, an exposure category that adequately reflects the characteristics of ground surface irregularities shall be determined for the site at which the building or structure is to be constructed. Account shall be taken of variations in ground surface roughness that arise from natural topography and vegetation as well as from constructed features.

The concept of exposure categories provides a means of accounting for the relative roughness of the boundary layer. The earth's surface exerts a horizontal drag force on wind due to ground obstructions that retard the flow of air close to the ground.

The reduction in the flow of air is a function of height above ground and terrain roughness. Wind speeds increase with height above ground, and the relationship between height above ground and wind speed is exponential. The rate of increase in wind speeds with height is a function of the terrain features. The rougher the terrain (such as large city centers), the shallower the slope of the wind speed profile. The smoother the terrain (open water), the steeper the slope of the wind speed profile.

The definitions of exposure and roughness categories are used to account for this roughness in the boundary layer and are intended to provide an adequate assessment of surface roughness for most situations. Exposure B is considered the roughest boundary layer condition. Exposure D is considered the smoothest boundary layer condition. Accordingly, calculated wind loads are less for Exposure B, which has more surface obstructions, as compared to Exposure D, with all other variables the same (see SBC 301 commentary for guidance on performing a more detailed analysis of surface roughness).

1609.4.1 Wind directions and sectors. For each selected wind direction at which the wind loads are to be evaluated, the exposure of the building or structure shall be determined for the two upwind sectors extending 45 degrees either side of the selected wind direction. The exposures in these two sectors shall be determined in accordance with Sections 1609.4.2 and 1609.4.3 and the exposure resulting in the highest wind loads shall be used to represent winds from that direction.

An exposure category must be determined for each direction in which wind loading is being considered. This section describes the method for doing so and requires use of the more restrictive exposure category where the two sectors in a given wind direction would be classified in different exposure categories.

1609.4.2 Surface roughness categories. A ground surface roughness within each 45-degree sector shall be determined for a distance upwind of the site as defined in Section 1609.4.3 from the following categories, for the purpose of assigning an exposure category as defined in Section 1609.4.3.

Surface Roughness B. Urban and suburban areas, wooded areas or other terrain with numerous closely spaced obstructions having the size of single-family dwellings or larger.

Surface Roughness C. Open terrain with scattered obstructions having heights generally less than 10 m. This category includes flat open country, and grasslands.

Surface Roughness D. Flat, unobstructed areas and water surfaces. This category includes smooth mud flats and salt flats.

This section defines three surface roughness categories that are used in evaluating each sector and, subsequently, in determining an exposure category. These surface roughnesses were previously included in the corresponding exposure category definition. The required upwind distance that must be considered varies according to the exposure category definition in Section 1609.4.3.

A significant philosophical change in determination of exposure categories occurred with the inclusion of shorelines in hurricane-prone regions in the definition of Exposure Category C (Surface Roughness C). Exposure Category D (Surface Roughness D) had been used for wind flowing over open water until further research determined that wave action at the water's surface in a hurricane had produced, because of the intensity of the turbulence, substantial surface obstructions and friction that reduces the wind profile values to be more in line with Surface Roughness C as opposed to Surface Roughness D. Surface Roughness D would still apply to inland waterways and shorelines that are not in the hurricane-prone regions.

1609.4.3 Exposure categories. An exposure category shall be determined in accordance with the following:

Exposure B. For buildings with a mean roof height of less than or equal to 9 m, Exposure B shall apply

===== Page 1536 =====
where the ground surface roughness, as defined by Surface Roughness B, prevails in the upwind direction for a distance of at least 450 m. For buildings with a mean roof height greater than 9 m, Exposure B shall apply where Surface Roughness B prevails in the upwind direction for a distance of not less than 780 m or 20 times the height of the building, whichever is greater.

Exposure C. Exposure C shall apply for all cases where Exposure B or D does not apply.

Exposure D. Exposure D shall apply where the ground surface roughness, as defined by Surface Roughness D, prevails in the upwind direction for a distance of not less than 1500 m or 20 times the height of the building, whichever is greater. Exposure D shall apply where the ground surface roughness immediately upwind of the site is B or C, and the site is within a distance of 180 m or 20 times the building height, whichever is greater, from an Exposure D condition as defined in the previous sentence.

This section defines the three exposure categories that are used to determine various wind load parameters. Exposure categories are used along with basic wind speed elsewhere in the code as a threshold for wind requirements, such as establishing the need for structural observation in Section 1704.6.

1609.5 Roof systems. Roof systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Sections 1609.5.1 through 1609.5.3, as applicable.

This section clarifies the design wind loads that are applied to roof decks and roof coverings.

1609.5.1 Roof deck. The roof deck shall be designed to withstand the wind pressures determined in accordance with SBC 301.

This section specifies the wind load criteria for the roof deck. The roof deck is a structural component of the building and must resist the applicable wind pressures of SBC 301. This section is referenced by Section 1609.5.2 as the criteria for the wind design for roof coverings that are relatively impermeable.

1609.5.2 Roof coverings. Roof coverings shall comply with Section 1609.5.1.

Exception: Rigid tile roof coverings that are air permeable and installed over a roof deck complying with Section 1609.5.1 are permitted to be designed in accordance with Section 1609.5.3.

Asphalt shingles installed over a roof deck complying with Section 1609.5.1 shall comply with the wind-resistance requirements of Section 1504.2

This section establishes the wind design criteria for roof coverings. The exception references the use of Section 1609.5.3 for air-permeable rigid tile roof coverings. If the roof deck is relatively impermeable, wind pressures will act through it to the building frame system. The roof covering may or may not be subjected to the same wind pressures as the roof deck. If the roof covering is also relatively impermeable and fastened to the roof deck, the two components will react to and resist the same wind pressures. If the roof covering is not impermeable, the wind pressures will be able to develop on both the top of, and underneath, the roof covering. This “venting action” will negate some wind pressure on the roof covering.

1609.5.3 Rigid tile. Wind loads on rigid tile roof coverings shall be determined in accordance with the following equation:

 \[ M_{a}=\frac{q_{h}C_{L}bL L_{a}[1.0-GC_{p}]}{1000} \quad (16-17) \]

where:

b = Exposed width, in mm of the roof tile.

 \( C_{L} \)  = Lift coefficient. The lift coefficient for concrete and clay tile shall be 0.2 or shall be determined by test in accordance with Section 1504.3.1.

 \( GC_{p}= \)  Roof pressure coefficient for each applicable roof zone determined from Chapter 30 of SBC 301. Roof coefficients shall not be adjusted for internal pressure.

L = Length, in mm of the roof tile.

 \( L_{a}= \)  Moment arm, in mm from the axis of rotation to the point of uplift on the roof tile. The point of uplift shall be taken at 0.76L from the head of the tile and the middle of the exposed width. For roof tiles with nails or screws (with or without a tail clip), the axis of rotation shall be taken as the head of the tile for direct deck application or as the top edge of the batten for battened applications. For roof tiles fastened only by a nail or screw along the side of the tile, the axis of rotation shall be determined by testing. For roof tiles installed with battens and fastened only by a clip near the tail of the tile, the moment arm shall be determined about the top edge of the batten with consideration given for the point of rotation of the tiles based on straight bond or broken bond and the tile profile.

 \( M_{a}= \)  Aerodynamic uplift moment, in N-mm acting to raise the tail of the tile.

 \( q_{h}= \)  Wind velocity pressure in  \( kN/m^{2} \)  determined from Section 27.3.2 of SBC 301.

Concrete and clay roof tiles complying with the following limitations shall be designed to withstand the aerodynamic uplift moment as determined by this section.

===== Page 1537 =====
1 The roof tiles shall be either loose laid on battens, mechanically fastened, mortar set or adhesive set.

2 The roof tiles shall be installed on solid sheathing that has been designed as components and cladding.

3 An underlayment shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 15.

4 The tile shall be single lapped interlocking with a minimum head lap of not less than 50 mm.

5 The length of the tile shall be between 300 and 525 mm.

6 The exposed width of the tile shall be between 200 and 375 mm.

7 The maximum thickness of the tail of the tile shall not exceed 30 mm.

8 Roof tiles using mortar set or adhesive set systems shall have not less than two-thirds of the tile's area free of mortar or adhesive contact.

This section includes the wind design method for clay or concrete rigid tile roofs. The method consists of the calculation of the aerodynamic uplift moment from the wind that acts to raise the end of the tile. This section includes the characteristics and the type of installation of the concrete or clay roof tile that are required for the use of the design method.

In certain types of installations, the roof covering is not exposed to the same wind loads as the roof deck. Concrete and clay roof tiles are typical of this type of installation and are not subject to wind loads that would be obtained from current wind-loading criteria. This is because gaps at the tile joints allow some equalization of pressure between the inner and outer face of the tiles, leading to reduced loads. A procedure has been developed through research for determining the uplift moment on loose-laid and mechanically fastened roof tiles when laid over sheathing with an underlayment. The procedure is based on practical measurements on real tiles to determine the effect of air being able to penetrate the roof covering.

## SECTION 1610 SOIL LOADS AND HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE

1610.1 Lateral pressures. Foundation walls and retaining walls shall be designed to resist lateral soil loads from adjacent soil. Soil loads specified in Table 1610.1 shall be used as the minimum design lateral soil loads unless determined otherwise by a geotechnical investigation in accordance with SBC 303. Foundation walls and other walls in which horizontal movement is restricted at the top shall be designed for at-rest pressure. Retaining walls free to move and rotate at the top shall be permitted to be designed for active pressure. Lateral pressure from surcharge loads shall be added to the lateral soil load. Lateral pressure shall be increased if expansive soils are present at the site. Foundation walls shall be designed to support the weight of the full hydrostatic pressure of undrained backfill unless a drainage system is installed in accordance with Sections 13.4.3 and 13.4.4 of SBC 303.

Exception: Foundation walls extending not more than 2.4 m below grade and laterally supported at the top by flexible diaphragms shall be permitted to be designed for active pressure.

This section provides lateral soil loads for various soil types. This section requires that foundation and retaining walls be designed to be capable of resisting the lateral soil loads specified by Table 1610.1 where a specific soil investigation has not been performed. Consideration must be given to additional lateral soil pressures caused by surcharge loads that result from sloping backfill, driveways or parking spaces that are close to a foundation wall, as well as the foundation of an adjacent structure.

The Table 1610.1 lists at-rest and active soil pressures for a number of different types of moist soils. The basis of the soil classification into the various types listed is ASTM D2487. Soils identified by Note b in Table 1610.1 have unpredictable characteristics. These are called expansive soils. Because of their ability to absorb water, they shrink and swell to a higher degree than other soils. As expansive soils swell, they are capable of exerting large forces on soil retaining structures; thus, these types of soils are not to be used as backfill.

1610.2 Uplift loads on floor and foundations. Basement floors, slabs on ground, foundations, and similar approximately horizontal elements below grade shall be designed to resist uplift loads where applicable. The upward pressure of water shall be taken as the full hydrostatic pressure applied over the entire area. The hydrostatic load shall be measured from the underside of the element being evaluated. The design for upward loads caused by expansive soils shall comply with SBC 303.

The hydrostatic pressure provision includes the requirement to determine the load based on measuring to the underside of the construction per SBC 301 Section 3.2.2.

## SECTION 1611 RAIN LOADS

1611.1 Design rain loads. Each portion of a roof shall be designed to sustain the load of rainwater as per the requirements of Chapter 8 of SBC 301. The design rainfall shall be based on the 100-year 15-

===== Page 1538 =====
minute duration event, or on other rainfall rates determined from approved local weather data. Alternatively, a design rainfall of twice the 100-year hourly rainfall rate indicated in Figure 1611.1 shall be permitted.

 \[ R=0.0098(d_{s}+d_{h}) \quad (16-18) \]

Where:
 \( d_{h} \)  = Additional depth of water on the undeflected roof above the inlet of secondary drainage system at its design flow (in other words the hydraulic head), in mm.

 \( d_{s} \)  = Depth of water on the undeflected roof up to the inlet of secondary drainage system when the primary drainage system is blocked (in other words the static head), in mm.

R = Rain load on the undeflected roof, in  \( kN/m^{2} \) . Where the phrase “undeflected roof” is used, deflections from loads (including dead loads) shall not be considered when determining the amount of rain on the roof.
This section references the requirements of Chapter 8 of SBC 301 for the design sustained load of rainwater for each roof portion based on the 100-year 15-minute duration event. The nominal rain load, R, is determined in accordance with this section. It represents the weight of accumulated rainwater, assuming a blockage of the primary roof drainage system. The design of the roof drainage systems must be in accordance with Chapter 11 of SBC 701. It is not uncommon to find that roof drains have become blocked by debris, leading to ponding of rainwater where the roof construction is conducive to retaining water. While the objective of providing roof drainage is typically to prevent the accumulation of water, the code also recognizes controlled drainage systems that are engineered to retain rainwater (see Section 1611.3). The important point is that wherever the potential exists for the accumulation of rainwater on a roof, whether it is intentional or otherwise, the roof must be designed for this load. Furthermore, Section 1101.7 of SBC 701 requires the maximum depth of water to be determined, assuming all primary roof drainage to be blocked. The water will rise above the primary roof drain until it reaches the elevation of the roof edge, scuppers or another serviceable drain. At the design rainfall intensity, this depth will be based on the flow rate of the secondary drainage system. This depth, referred to as the hydraulic head, can be determined from Commentary Figure 1611.1(2) for various types of drains and flow rates. Use of hydraulic head is illustrated in the example “Rain Load on Roof with Overflow Scuppers”. Section 1108 of SBC 701 specifically requires a secondary roof drainage system where the building construction extends above the roof at the perimeter. This applies to parapet walls, stepped buildings or any other construction that would allow rainwater to pond on the roof. The sizing of a secondary drainage system is identical to the process used for the primary system. Instead of using a “piped” secondary system, designers may prefer to install scuppers to allow rainwater to overflow the roof. Examples of both types of secondary systems are shown in Commentary Figure 1611.1(3). Also note that SBC 701 requires a secondary system to be completely separate and to discharge above grade. Since the secondary system serves as an emergency backup, requiring it to discharge above grade provides a means of signaling that there is a blockage of the primary drainage system.

Some roof failures have been attributed to the increased loads from ponding water. This section requires the roof to be capable of resisting the maximum water depth that can occur if the primary means of roof drainage becomes blocked. Blockages are typically caused by debris at the inlet to the primary roof drains, but they can occur anywhere along the primary piping system, such as an under-slab pipe collapse. Computation of rain load, R, is in accordance with Equation 16-18. The coefficient of that equation is merely the conversion of the unit weight of water to an equivalent unit load per mm of water depth as Commentary Figure 1611.1(4) illustrates. Two variables are considered to determine rain load: the depth of the water on the undeflected roof, as measured from the low point elevation to the inlet elevation of the secondary drain; and the additional depth of water at the secondary drainage flow, respectively referred to as static head and hydraulic head. The sum of these depths is the design depth for computing rain load, R, as indicated in Equation 16-18. An example of the computation of rain load is provided in the following example [also see Commentary Figure 1611.1(5)].

The alternative of utilizing a design rainfall of twice the 100-year hourly (60-minute) rainfall indicated in Figure 1611.1(1) is based on the concept that the use of twice the flow rate of the 60-minute duration is close to the design intensity for the 15-minute duration storm.
EXAMPLE
Rain Load on Roof with Overflow Scuppers
Given:
Primary roof drain and overflow scupper shown in Commentary Figure 1611.1(5).
Static head,  \( d_{s} = 180mm \)
Tributary area,  \( A = 502m^{2} \)

===== Page 1539 =====
Rainfall rate, i = 0.064 m/hr

Determine:

Hydraulic head,  \( d_{h} \)

Rain load, R

Calculate required flow rate, Q, at scupper in  \( m^{3}/s \)

Q = A × i = 502  \( m^{2} \)  × 0.064 m/hour

= 32.18  \( m^{3}/hr \)  = 0.0089  \( m^{3}/s \)

Look up hydraulic head using Figure 1611.1(2).

For 150 mm wide, 150 mm high scupper, find 0.0089  \( m^{3}/s \)

 \( d_{h} = 100 \)  mm

Determine rain load, R.

Total head =  \( (d_{s} + d_{h}) = 280 \)  mm

R = 0.0098  \( (d_{s} + d_{h}) \)

R = 2.74 kN/m \( ^{2} \)

Including these SBC 701 maps in the code provides the structural designer with design criteria that are essential for determining the rain load. Figure 1611.1(1) consist of map for various regions of the Saudi Arabia. This figure provides the rainfall rates for a storm of 1-hour duration that has a 100-year return period. Rainfall rates indicate the maximum rate of rainfall within the given period of time occurring at the stated frequency.

1611.2 Ponding instability. Susceptible bays of roofs shall be evaluated for ponding instability in accordance with Chapters 7 and 8 of SBC 301.

In roofs lacking sufficient framing stiffness, a condition known as “ponding instability” can occur where increasingly larger deflections caused by the continued accumulation of rainwater are large enough to overload the structure and result in a roof collapse. This must be countered by providing adequate stiffness in order to prevent increasingly larger deflections due to the buildup of rainwater. Another means to minimize the accumulation of rainwater is to camber the roof framing. This section requires a check for ponding instability at susceptible bays (see definition of “Susceptible Bay,” Section 202). A ponding instability check is to be made assuming the primary roof drains are blocked. The determination of ponding instability is typically done by an iterative structural analysis where the incremental deflection is determined and the resulting increased rain load from the deflection is added to the original rain load.

1611.3 Controlled drainage. Roofs equipped with hardware to control the rate of drainage shall be equipped with a secondary drainage system at a higher elevation that limits accumulation of water on the roof above that elevation. Such roofs shall be designed to sustain the load of rainwater that will accumulate on them to the elevation of the secondary drainage system plus the uniform load caused by water that rises above the inlet of the secondary drainage system at its design flow determined from Section 1611.1. Such roofs shall also be checked for ponding instability in accordance with Section 1611.2.

Controlled drainage is the limitation of the drainage flow rate to a rate that is less than the rainfall rate such that the depth of the water intentionally builds up on the roof during a design rainfall. Controlled flow roof drain systems must be designed in accordance with Section 1110 of SBC 701. A secondary roof drain system is needed to limit the buildup of water to a specific depth for roof design. The depth of water on the roof is also to include the depth of the water above the inlet of the secondary drain when the design flow rate is reached. Consideration of the effect of the accumulated rainwater is identical to assuming a blockage in the primary drainage system as discussed under Section 1611.1.

## SECTION 1612 FLOOD LOADS

1612.1 General. The design and construction of buildings and structures located in flood hazard areas, including coastal high hazard areas and coastal A zones, shall be in accordance with Chapter 5 of SBC 301.

## SECTION 1613 EARTHQUAKE LOADS

1613.1 Scope. Every structure, and portion thereof, including nonstructural components that are permanently attached to structures and their supports and attachments, shall be designed and constructed to resist the effects of earthquake motions in accordance with Chapters 11, 12, 13, 15, 17 and 18 of SBC 301, as applicable. The seismic design category for a structure is permitted to be determined in accordance with Section 1613 or SBC 301.

Exceptions:

1. Detached one- and two-family dwellings, assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B or C, or located where the mapped short-period spectral response acceleration,  \( S_{s} \) , is less than 0.4 g.

2. Agricultural storage structures intended only for incidental human occupancy.

3. Structures that require special consideration of their response characteristics and environment that are not addressed by this code or SBC 301 and for which other regulations provide seismic criteria, such as vehicular bridges, electrical transmission towers, hydraulic structures, buried utility lines and their appurtenances and nuclear reactors.

===== Page 1540 =====
4. References within SBC 301 to Chapter 14 shall not apply, except as specifically required herein.

These code provisions provide the requirements essential to determining a building's seismic design category. The balance of the earthquake load provisions are contained in SBC 301 load standard. The chapters that are noted as excluded from SBC 301 referenced standard are those that can create conflicts with Chapters 17 through 23. The balance of SBC 301 earthquake load provisions are as follows:

Chapter Subject

11 Seismic Design Criteria

12 Seismic Design Requirements for Building Structures

13 Seismic Design Requirements for Nonstructural Components

15 Seismic Design Requirements for Non-building Structures

16 Seismic Response History Procedures

17 Seismic Design Requirements for Seismically Isolated Structures

18 Seismic Design Requirements for Structures with Damping Systems

19 Soil Structure Interaction for Seismic Design

20 Site Classification Procedure for Seismic Design

21 Site-specific Ground Motion Procedures for Seismic Design

22 Seismic Ground Motion and Long-Period Transition Maps

23 Seismic Design Reference Documents

These seismic requirements are intended to minimize the hazard to life for all buildings, increase the expected performance of higher-occupancy buildings as compared to ordinary buildings, and improve the capability of essential facilities to function during and after an earthquake. These minimum criteria are considered to be prudent and economically justified for the protection of life safety in buildings subject to earthquakes. Achieving the intended performance depends on a number of factors, including the type of structural framing, configuration, construction materials and as-built details of construction.

There are four exceptions to the seismic design requirements included in this section. The following discussion addresses these exceptions.
Exception 1 exempts detached one- and two-family dwellings under two conditions. The first applies to structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B or C (meaning that both  \( S_{DS} < 0.5g \)  and  \( S_{D1} < 0.2g \) ). The second is for structures having a value for mapped short-period spectral response acceleration,  \( S_{s} \) , less than 0.4g. The latter condition is derived from SBC 301 seismic provisions. Since it is based solely on the mapped value for short periods, it may allow structures to qualify more directly for this exception than will the first condition. In other words, the value of  \( S_{s} \)  should be checked first. If the structure qualifies based on  \( S_{s} \) , then it is not necessary to check the seismic design category.

In Exception 2, agricultural buildings are exempt because they present a minimal life-safety hazard due to the low probability of human occupancy.

Exception 3 corresponds to an SBC 301 exception regarding structures that are covered under other regulations, making it unnecessary to comply with the earthquake load requirements of the code.

1613.2 Seismic ground motion values. Seismic ground motion values shall be determined in accordance with this section.

The design earthquake ground motion levels determined in this section may result in damage, both structural and nonstructural, from the high stresses that occur because of the dynamic nature of seismic events. For most structures, damage from the design earthquake ground motion would be repairable but might be so costly as to make it economically undesirable. For essential facilities, it is expected that damage from the design earthquake ground motion would not be so severe as to prevent continued occupancy and function of the facility. For ground motions greater than the design levels, the intent is that there be a low likelihood of structural collapse.

1613.2.1 Mapped acceleration parameters. The parameters  \( S_{s} \)  and  \( S_{1} \)  shall be determined from the 0.2 and 1-second spectral response accelerations shown on Figure 1613.2.1(1) and Figure 1613.2.1(2). Where  \( S_{1} \)  is less than or equal to 0.04g and  \( S_{s} \)  is less than or equal to .15g, the structure is permitted to be assigned Seismic Design Category A.

The mapped maximum considered earthquake spectral response accelerations at 0.2-second period  \( (S_{s}) \)  and 1-second period  \( (S_{1}) \)  for a particular site are to be determined from Figure 1613.2.1(1) and Figure 1613.2.1(2). Where a site is between contours, as would usually be the case, straight-line interpolation or the value of the higher contour may be used. Areas that

===== Page 1541 =====
are considered to have a low seismic risk based solely on the mapped ground motions are placed directly into Seismic Design Category A.

The code Figure 1613.2.1(1) and Figure 1613.2.1(2) provide the 5-percent damped spectral response accelerations at 0.2-second period  \( (S_{s}) \) , as well as at 1-second period  \( (S_{1}) \)  for Site Class B soil profiles.

1613.2.2 Site class definitions. Based on the site soil properties, the site shall be classified as Site Class A, B, C, D, E or F in accordance with Chapter 20 of SBC 301.

Where the soil properties are not known in sufficient detail to determine the site class, Site Class D, subjected to the requirements of Section 1613.2.3, shall be used unless the building official or geotechnical data determines that Site Class E or F soils are present at the site.

Where site investigations that are performed in accordance with Chapter 20 of SBC 301 reveal rock conditions consistent with Site Class B, but site-specific velocity measurements are not made, the site coefficients  \( F_{a} \)  and  \( F_{v} \)  shall be taken at unity (1.0).

Each site is to be classified as one of six site classes (A through F), as defined in SBC 301, based on one of three soil properties measured over the top 30 m of the site. If the top 30 m are not homogeneous, SBC 301 provisions address how to determine average properties. Site Class A is hard rock. Site Class B is softer rock. Site Class C, D or E indicates progressively softer soils. From an earthquake resistance perspective, rock is the best material for most structures to be founded on. Site Class F indicates soil so poor that site-specific geotechnical investigation and dynamic site-response analysis are needed to determine appropriate site coefficients.

The three soil properties forming the basis of site classification are: shear wave velocity, standard penetration resistance or blow count (determined in accordance with ASTM D1586), and undrained shear strength (determined in accordance with ASTM D2166 or ASTM D2850). Site Class A and B designations must be based on shear wave velocity measurements or estimates.

Where soil property measurements to a depth of 30 m are not feasible, the registered design professional performing the geotechnical investigation may estimate appropriate soil properties based on known geologic conditions.

When soil properties are not known in sufficient detail to determine the site class, the default site class is D, unless the building official determines that Site Class E or F soil may exist at the site.
1613.2.3 Site coefficients and adjusted maximum considered earthquake spectral response acceleration parameters. The maximum considered earthquake spectral response acceleration for short periods,  \( S_{MS} \) , and at 1-second period,  \( S_{M1} \) , adjusted for site class effects shall be determined by Equations 16-19 and 16-20, respectively:

 \[ \begin{array}{c}S_{MS}=F_{a}S_{s}\\S_{M1}=F_{v}S_{1}\end{array} \quad (16-19) \quad (16-20) \]

but  \( S_{MS} \)  shall not be taken less than  \( S_{M1} \)  except when determining Seismic Design Category in accordance with Section 1613.2.5.

where:

 \( F_{a} \)  = Site coefficient defined in Table 1613.2.3(1).

 \( F_{v} \)  = Site coefficient defined in Table 1613.2.3(2).

 \( S_{s}= \)  The mapped spectral accelerations for short periods as determined in Section 1613.1.

 \( S_{1}= \)  The mapped spectral accelerations for a 1-second period as determined in Section 1613.1.

Where Site Class D is selected as the default site class per Section 1613.2.2, the value of  \( F_{a} \)  shall be not less than 1.2. Where the simplified design procedure of SBC 301 Section 12.14 is used, the value of  \( F_{a} \)  shall be determined in accordance with SBC 301 Section 12.14.8.1, and the values of  \( F_{p} \) ,  \( S_{M} \)  and  \( S_{m1} \)  need not be determined.

Table 1613.2.3(1) defines an acceleration-related or short-period site coefficient,  \( F_{a} \) , as a function of site class and the mapped spectral response acceleration at 0.2-second period,  \( S_{s} \) . Table 1613.2.3(2) similarly defines a velocity-related or long-period site coefficient,  \( F_{v} \) , as a function of site class and the mapped spectral response acceleration at 1-second period,  \( S_{1} \) . The acceleration-related or short-period site coefficient,  \( F_{a} \)  times  \( S_{s} \) , is  \( S_{MS} \) , the 5-percent damped soil-modified maximum considered earthquake spectral response acceleration at short periods. The velocity-related or long-period site coefficient,  \( F_{v} \)  times  \( S_{1} \) , is  \( S_{M1} \) , the 5-percent damped soil-modified maximum considered earthquake spectral response acceleration at 1-second period. Such modification by site coefficients is necessary because the mapped quantities are for Site Class B soils.

As one would expect, both the short-period site coefficient,  \( F_{a} \) , and the long-period site coefficient,  \( F_{v} \) , are equal to unity for the benchmark Site Class B, irrespective of seismicity of the site. For Site Class A, both coefficients are smaller than unity, indicating reduction of benchmark Site Class B ground motion caused by the stiffer soils. For Site

===== Page 1542 =====
Classes C through E, both site coefficients, with the exception of  \( F_{a} \)  for Site Class E where  \( S_{s} \geq 1.00 \) , are larger than 1, indicating amplification of benchmark Site Class B ground motion on softer soils. For the same site class, each site coefficient is typically larger in areas of low seismicity than in areas of high seismicity. The basis of this lies in observations that low-magnitude subsurface rock motion is amplified to a larger extent by overlying softer soils than is high-magnitude rock motion. The site coefficients typically become larger for progressively softer soils. The only exception is provided by the short-period site coefficient in areas of high seismicity ( \( S_{s} \geq 0.75 \) ), which remain unchanged or even decrease as the site class changes from D to E. The basis for this also lies in observations that very soft soils are not capable of amplifying the short-period components of subsurface rock motion.

 \( F_{a} \) , the acceleration-related or short-period site coefficient, is defined in the Table 1613.2.3(1) as a function of site class and the seismicity at the site in the form of the mapped spectral response acceleration at 0.2-second period,  \( S_{s} \) , the velocity-related or long-period site coefficient, is defined in the Table 1613.2.3(2) as a function of site class and the seismicity at the site in the form of the mapped spectral response acceleration at 1-second period,  \( S_{1} \) .

1613.2.4 Design spectral response acceleration parameters. Five-percent damped design spectral response acceleration at short periods,  \( S_{DS} \) , and at 1-second period,  \( S_{D1} \) , shall be determined from Equations 16-21 and 16-22, respectively:

 \[ S_{DS}=\frac{2}{3}S_{MS} \quad (16-21) \]

 \[ S_{D1}=\frac{2}{3}S_{M1} \quad (16-22) \]

Where
 \( S_{MS} = \frac{1}{2} \)  The maximum considered earthquake spectral response accelerations for short period as determined in Section 1613.2.3.

 \( S_{M1} = \frac{1}{2} \)  The maximum considered earthquake spectral response accelerations for 1-second period as determined in Section 1613.2.3.

The design spectral response acceleration at 0.2-second period,  \( S_{DS} \) , is two-thirds of the  \( S_{MS} \)  value calculated in accordance with Section 1613.2.3. The design spectral response acceleration at 1-second period,  \( S_{D1} \) , is two-thirds of the  \( S_{M1} \)  value calculated in accordance with Section 1613.2.3 and the reciprocal of two-thirds is 1.5. Thus, the design ground motion is the soil-modified maximum considered earthquake ground motion divided by 1.5. This is in recognition of the inherent margin contained in the NEHRP provisions that would make collapse unlikely under 1.5 times the design-level ground motion. The idea is to avoid collapse when a structure is subjected to the soil-modified maximum considered earthquake ground motion.

1613.2.5 Determination of seismic design category. Structures classified as Risk Category I, II or III that are located where the mapped spectral response acceleration parameter at 1-second period,  \( S_{1} \) , is greater than or equal to 0.75g shall be assigned to Seismic Design Category E. Structures classified as Risk Category IV that are located where the mapped spectral response acceleration parameter at 1-second period,  \( S_{1} \) , is greater than or equal to 0.75g shall be assigned to Seismic Design Category F. Other structures shall be assigned to a seismic design category based on their risk category and the design spectral response acceleration parameters,  \( S_{DS} \)  and  \( S_{D1} \) , determined in accordance with Section 1613.2.4 or the site-specific procedures of SBC 301. Each building and structure shall be assigned to the more severe seismic design category in accordance with Table 1613.3.5(1) or Table 1613.3.5(2), irrespective of the fundamental period of vibration of the structure, T.

The seismic design category classification provides a relative scale of earthquake risk to structures. The seismic design category considers not only the seismicity of the site in terms of the mapped spectral response accelerations, but also the site soil profile and the nature of the structure's risk category (see the step-by-step description of this process under the definition of "Seismic design category"). It is important to note that there are two tables that are used in order to establish the most restrictive seismic design category classification.

There are two conditions that allow the seismic design category to be determined based on mapped spectral accelerations, making it unnecessary to go through the process described above. The first is Section 1613.1, which identifies areas that have a low seismic risk and are classified as Seismic Design Category A without the need to go through the usual steps. The second instance is an area that is close to a major active fault where  \( S_{1} \)  is greater than or equal to 0.75g. These areas are deemed to be areas of considerable seismic risk, and the seismic design category is classified as E or F depending on the structure's risk category.

The seismic design category classification is a key criterion in using and understanding the seismic requirements because that classification, at least in part, determines the

===== Page 1543 =====
analysis method, general design, structural material detailing and the structure's component and system design requirements. Some of the Chapter 17 special inspection requirements and structural observation requirements are dependent on the seismic design category classification.

The Table 1613.3.5(1) defines seismic design category as a function of risk category and the short-period (0.2 second) spectral response acceleration at the site of a structure. As the value of SDs increases, the structure is assigned a higher seismic design category and the earthquake design requirements become more stringent.

The Table 1613.3.5(2) defines seismic design category as a function of risk category and the long-period (1-second) spectral response acceleration at the site of a structure. As the value of SMI increases, the structure is assigned a higher seismic design category and the earthquake design requirements become more stringent.

1613.2.5.1 Alternative seismic design category determination. Where  \( S_{1} \)  is less than 0.75g, the seismic design category is permitted to be determined from Table 1613.3.5(1) alone when all of the following apply:

1 In each of the two orthogonal directions, the approximate fundamental period of the structure,  \( T_{a} \) , in each of the two orthogonal directions determined in accordance with Section 12.8.2.4 of SBC 301, is less than 0.8  \( T_{s} \)  determined in accordance with Section 11.4.5 of SBC 301.

2 In each of the two orthogonal directions, the fundamental period of the structure used to calculate the story drift is less than  \( T_{s} \) .

3 Equation 12-13 of SBC 301 is used to determine the seismic response coefficient,  \( C_{s} \) .

4 The diaphragms are rigid or are permitted to be idealized as rigid in accordance with Section 12.3.1 of SBC 301 or, for diaphragms permitted to be idealized as flexible in accordance with Section 12.3.1 of SBC 301, the distances between vertical elements of the seismic force-resisting system do not exceed 12 m.

This section permits the seismic design category of short-period structures meeting the four listed conditions to be based solely on the short-period design spectral coefficient,  \( S_{DS} \) . This is similar to the approach taken in mapping seismic design categories for use in SBC 1101/1102, as well as for the simplified earthquake analysis procedure.
1613.2.5.2 Simplified design procedure. Where the alternate simplified design procedure of SBC 301 is used, the seismic design category shall be determined in accordance with SBC 301.

This section directly references SBC 301 for the appropriate seismic design category to utilize with the simplified design procedure.

1613.3 Ballasted photovoltaic panel systems. Ballasted, roof-mounted photovoltaic panel systems need not be rigidly attached to the roof or supporting structure. Ballasted nonpenetrating systems shall be designed and installed only on roofs with slopes not more than one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal. Ballasted nonpenetrating systems shall be designed to resist sliding and uplift resulting from lateral and vertical forces as required by Section 1605, using a coefficient of friction determined by acceptable engineering principles. In structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F, ballasted nonpenetrating systems shall be designed to accommodate seismic displacement determined by nonlinear response-history or other approved analysis or shake-table testing, using input motions consistent with SBC 301 lateral and vertical seismic forces for nonstructural components on roofs.

In general, nonstructural rooftop elements that have significant mass or sail area are required to be positively anchored to competent structural elements. Photovoltaic panel systems that have sufficient weight to preclude sliding and uplift from wind need not be positively anchored to resist seismic loads provided that the slope of the roof is low, and provided that the systems are designed to accommodate the anticipated seismic displacement (i.e., sliding).

## SECTION 1614 ATMOSPHERIC ICE LOADS

1614.1 General. Atmospheric Ice load is inapplicable to KSA.

## SECTION 1615 TSUNAMI LOADS

1615.1 General. The design and construction of Risk Category III and IV buildings and structures located in the Tsunami Design Zones defined in the Tsunami Design Geodatabase shall be in accordance with Chapter 6 of SBC 301, except as modified by this code.

There are many coastal communities in Alaska, Washington, Oregon, California, and Hawaii where there is a need for tsunami-resistant design of critical infrastructure and essential facilities that provide vital services necessary for post-disaster response and recovery and enable the continued functioning of the community. The public safety risk has

===== Page 1544 =====
been only partially mitigated through warning and preparedness of evacuation; there are many areas in these five states where complete evacuation prior to tsunami arrival cannot be ensured. Accordingly, some communities also have a need for a standard for designated tsunami vertical evacuation refuge structures as an alternative to high ground.

## SECTION 1616 STRUCTURAL INTEGRITY

1616.1 General. High-rise buildings that are assigned to Risk Category III or IV shall comply with the requirements of Section 1616.2 if they are frame structures or Section 1616.3 if they are bearing wall structures.

The requirements in the codes and standards together with the common structural design and construction practices have provided the overwhelming majority of structures with adequate levels of reliability and safety. Many buildings simply do not have integrity issues. Low-rise buildings do not pose the same risk as high-rise buildings. The structural integrity provisions reflect this relative risk. By limiting this requirement to Risk Category III and IV buildings that are also high-rise buildings, the provisions do not affect buildings that are commonly built and do not exhibit integrity issues.

1616.2 Frame structures. Frame structures shall comply with the requirements of this section.

These provisions enhance the overall structural integrity and resistance of frame structures by establishing minimum requirements for tying together the primary structural elements.

1616.2.1 Concrete frame structures. Frame structures constructed primarily of reinforced or prestressed concrete, either cast-in-place or precast, or a combination of these, shall conform to the requirements of Section 4.10 of SBC 304. Where SBC 304 requires that nonprestressed reinforcing or prestressing steel pass through the region bounded by the longitudinal column reinforcement, that reinforcing or prestressing steel shall have a minimum nominal tensile strength equal to two-thirds of the required one-way vertical strength of the connection of the floor or roof system to the column in each direction of beam or slab reinforcement passing through the column.

Exception: Where concrete slabs with continuous reinforcement having an area not less than 0.0015 times the concrete area in each of two orthogonal directions are present and are either monolithic with or equivalently bonded to beams, girders or columns, the longitudinal reinforcing or prestressing steel passing through the column reinforcement shall have a nominal tensile strength of one-third of the required one-way vertical strength of the connection of the floor or roof system to the column in each direction of beam or slab reinforcement passing through the column.

This section refers to SBC 304 requirements for structural integrity that are applicable to concrete frames. These provisions establish minimum requirements for tying together the primary structural elements. These SBC 304 structural integrity requirements are already incorporated in the code by the general reference to SBC 304 in Section 1901.2 for the design and construction of structural concrete. The only additional requirement for concrete frame structures is the minimum nominal tensile strength that is established for reinforcement that must pass through the longitudinal column reinforcement. The exception reduces this minimum nominal tensile strength for slab construction that meets certain conditions.

1616.2.2 Structural steel, open web steel joist or joist girder, or composite steel and concrete frame structures. Frame structures constructed with a structural steel frame, or a frame composed of open web steel joists, joist girders with or without other structural steel elements or a frame composed of composite steel or composite steel joists and reinforced concrete elements shall conform to the requirements of this section.

The provisions contained in this section have been adapted from requirements contained in SBC 304. By adapting those requirements to structural steel, open web steel joists, joist girders or composite steel and concrete frame structures, their overall structural integrity is enhanced.

1616.2.2.1 Columns. Each column splice shall have the minimum design strength in tension to transfer the design dead and live load tributary to the column between the splice and the splice or base immediately below.

The additional requirement for the tensile strength of column splices enhances the column's performance in unforeseen events.

1616.2.2.2 Beams. End connections of all beams and girders shall have a minimum nominal axial tensile strength equal to the required vertical shear strength for allowable stress design (ASD) or two-thirds of the required shear strength for load and resistance factor design (LRFD) but not less than 45 kN. For the purpose of this section, the

===== Page 1545 =====
shear force and the axial tensile force need not be considered to act simultaneously.

Exception: Where beams, girders, open web joist and joist girders support a concrete slab or concrete slab on metal deck that is attached to the beam or girder with not less than 10 mm-diameter headed shear studs, at a spacing of not more than 300 mm on center, averaged over the length of the member, or other attachment having equivalent shear strength, and the slab contains continuous distributed reinforcement in each of two orthogonal directions with an area not less than 0.0015 times the concrete area, the nominal axial tension strength of the end connection shall be permitted to be taken as half the required vertical shear strength for ASD or one-third of the required shear strength for LRFD, but not less than 45 kN.

Providing the required tensile strength for all beam and girder connections provides some ability to carry, transfer and/or redistribute load in the event there is loss of support. The exception allows a reduced tensile strength in the beam and girder connection where a concrete slab is utilized.

1616.3 Bearing wall structures. Bearing wall structures shall have vertical ties in all load-bearing walls and longitudinal ties, transverse ties and perimeter ties at each floor level in accordance with this section and as shown in Figure 1616.3.

These provisions enhance the overall structural integrity and resistance of bearing wall structures by establishing minimum requirements for tying together the primary structural elements.

This Figure 1616.3 illustrates the ties that are required in Section 1616.2.

1616.3.1 Concrete wall structures. Precast bearing wall structures constructed solely of reinforced or prestressed concrete, or combinations of these shall conform to the requirements of Sections 16.2.4 and 16.2.5 of SBC 304.

This section refers to SBC 304 requirements that are applicable to concrete wall structures. These provisions establish minimum requirements for tying together the primary structural elements. These SBC 304 structural integrity requirements are already incorporated into the code by the general reference to SBC 304 in Section 1901.2 for the design and construction of structural concrete.

1616.3.2 Other bearing wall structures. Ties in bearing wall structures other than those covered in Section 1616.2.1 shall conform to this section.

The provisions contained in this section have been adapted from requirements contained within SBC 304. By adapting those requirements to other bearing wall structures, these provisions enhance their overall structural integrity.

1616.3.2.1 Longitudinal ties. Longitudinal ties shall consist of continuous reinforcement in slabs; continuous or spliced decks or sheathing; continuous or spliced members framing to, within or across walls; or connections of continuous framing members to walls. Longitudinal ties shall extend across interior load-bearing walls and shall be spaced at not greater than 3 m on center. Ties shall have a minimum nominal tensile strength,  \( T_{T} \) , given by Equation 16-23. For ASD the minimum nominal tensile strength shall be permitted to be taken as 1.5 times the allowable tensile stress times the area of the tie.

 \[ T_{T}=wLS\leq\alpha_{T}S \quad (16-23) \]

where:
L = The span of the horizontal element in the direction of the tie, between bearing walls, m.

w = The weight per unit area of the floor or roof in the span being tied to or across the wall,  \( N/m^{2} \) .

S = The spacing between ties, m.

 \( \alpha_{T} = A \)  coefficient with a value of  \( 22 \, kN/m \)  for masonry bearing wall structures and a value of  \( 5.5 \, kN/m \)  for structures with bearing walls of cold-formed steel light-frame construction.

Requirements for tying together horizontal elements in the longitudinal direction (spanning between bearing walls—noted as “L” in Commentary Figure 1616.3) provide for transfer and/or redistribution of loads in the event there is loss of support.

1616.3.2.2 Transverse ties. Transverse ties shall consist of continuous reinforcement in slabs; continuous or spliced decks or sheathing; continuous or spliced members framing to, within or across walls; or connections of continuous framing members to walls. Transverse ties shall be placed not farther apart than the spacing of load-bearing walls. Transverse ties shall have minimum nominal tensile strength  \( T_{T} \) , given by Equation 16-23. For ASD the minimum nominal tensile strength shall be permitted to be taken as 1.5 times the allowable tensile stress times the area of the tie.

Requirements for ties in the transverse direction at bearing walls (noted as "T" in Commentary Figure 1616.3) provide for transfer and/or redistribution of loads in the event there is loss of support.

===== Page 1546 =====
1616.3.2.3 Perimeter ties. Perimeter ties shall consist of continuous reinforcement in slabs; continuous or spliced decks or sheathing; continuous or spliced members framing to, within or across walls; or connections of continuous framing members to walls. Ties around the perimeter of each floor and roof shall be located within 1.2 m of the edge and shall provide a nominal strength in tension not less than  \( T_{p} \) , given by Equation 16-24. For ASD the minimum nominal tensile strength shall be permitted to be taken as 1.5 times the allowable tensile stress times the area of the tie.

 \[ T_{p}=90.7w\leq\beta_{T} \quad (16-24) \]

where:
w = As defined in Section 1616.2.2.1.
 \( \beta_{T} \)  = A coefficient with a value of 71 kN for structures with masonry bearing walls and a value of 17.8 kN for structures with bearing walls of cold-formed steel light-frame construction.

Requirements for tying together horizontal elements at the perimeter in both the longitudinal and transverse directions (noted as "P/L" and "P/T" in Commentary Figure 1616.3) provide for transfer and/or redistribution of loads in the event there is loss of support.

1616.3.2.4 Vertical ties. Vertical ties shall consist of continuous or spliced reinforcing, continuous or spliced members, wall sheathing or other engineered systems. Vertical tension ties shall be provided in bearing walls and shall be continuous over the height of the building. The minimum nominal tensile strength for vertical ties within a bearing wall shall be equal to the weight of the wall within that story plus the weight of the diaphragm tributary to the wall in the story below. Not fewer than two ties shall be provided for each wall. The strength of each tie need not exceed 44 kN/m of wall tributary to the tie for walls of masonry construction or 11 kN/m of wall tributary to the tie for walls of cold-formed steel light-frame construction.

The additional requirement for continuous vertical ties enhances the performance of bearing walls in unforeseen events (noted as "V" in Commentary Figure 1616.3).

===== Page 1547 =====
## Bibliography

The following resource materials were used in the preparation of the commentary for this chapter of the code:

1 ADA, Accessibility Guidelines for Building and Facilities. 28 CFR, Part 36 revised, July 1, 1994.

2 AWC WFCM-15, Wood Frame Construction Manual for One- and Two-family Dwellings. Leesburg, VA: American Wood Council, 2015.

3 AISC 341-10, Seismic Provisions for Structural Steel Buildings. Chicago: American Institute of Steel Construction, Inc., 2010.

4 AISC 360-10, Specification for Structural Steel Buildings. Chicago, IL: American Institute of Steel Construction, Inc., 2010.

5 ASCE 7-10, Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures Including Supplement No. 1. New York: American Society of Civil Engineers, 2010.

6 ASCE 24-13, Flood-resistance Design and Construction Standard. Reston, VA: American Society of Civil Engineers, 2013.

7 ASTM E1886-05, Test Method for Performance of Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls, Doors and Storm Shutters Impacted by Missiles and Exposed to Cyclic Pressure Differentials. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2005.

8 ASTM E1996-12A, Specification for Performance of Exterior Windows, Curtain Walls, Doors and Storm Shutters Impacted by Wind-borne Debris in Hurricanes. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2012.

9 FEMA 44 CFR, Parts 59-73, National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). Washington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency.

10 FEMA (various dates). NFIP Technical Bulletin Series. Washington, DC: National Flood Insurance Program. Available at www.fema.gov.plan/prevent/floodplain/techbul.shtml.

11 FEMA Form 086-0-33. NFIP Elevation Certificate. Washington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2012.

12 FEMA Form 086-0-34, Floodproofing Certificate. Wash-ington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2012.

13 FEMA P-750-1, NEHRP Recommended Provisions for Seismic Regulations for New Buildings and Other Structures, Part 1. Washington, DC: Prepared by the Building Seismic Safety Council for the Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2009.

14 FEMA P-750-2, NEHRP Recommended Provisions for Seismic Regulations for New Buildings and Other Structures, Part 2 Commentary. Washington, DC: Prepared by the Building Seismic Safety Council for the Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2009.

15 FEMA P-758, Substantial Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk Reference. Washington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2009.

16 FEMA TB #1, Openings in Foundation Walls and Walls of Enclosures Below Elevated Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas. Washington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2008.

17 FEMA TB #3, Nonresidential Floodproofing Requirements and Certification for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas. Washington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency, 1993.

18 FEMA TB #5, Free-of-Obstruction Requirements for Buildings Located in Coastal High-hazard Areas. Washington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2008.

19 FEMA TB #9, Design and Construction Guidance for Breakaway Walls Below Elevated Coastal Buildings. Washington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2008.

20 ICC 600-08, Standard for Residential Construction in High-wind Regions. Washington, DC: International Code Council, 2008.

21 Reducing Flood Losses Through the International Code Series: Meeting the Requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program (3rd ed.). Washington, DC: International Code Council, 2008.

22 SEAW's Handbook of a Rapid-solutions Methodology for Wind Design. Redwood City, CA: Structural Engineers Association of Washington, Applied Technology Council, 2004.

===== Page 1548 =====
23 SEAW/ATC 60, SEAW Commentary on Wind Code Provisions, Volume 1. Redwood City, CA: Applied Technology Council, 2004.

24 SEAW/ATC 60, SEAW Commentary on Wind Code Provisions, Volume 2—Example Problems. Redwood City, CA: Applied Technology Council, 2004.

25 Taly, Narendra. Loads and Load Paths in Buildings: Principles of Structural Design. Washington, DC: International Code Council, 2003.

26 Taly, Narendra. Loads and Load Paths in Buildings: Principles of Structural Design—Problems and Solutions. Washington, DC: International Code Council, 2005.

27 Williams, Alan. Seismic- and Wind-forces Structural Design Examples, Second Edition. Washington, DC: International Code Council, 2005.

===== Page 1549 =====
## TABLES AND FIGURES OF CHAPTER 16

TABLE 1604.3

DEFLECTION LIMITS \( ^{a,b,c,h,i} \)

<table>CONSTRUCTIONLWfD+Ld,gRoof members:Supporting plaster or stucco ceilingL/360L/360L/240Supporting nonplaster ceilingL/240L/240L/180Not supporting ceilingL/180L/180L/120Floor membersL/360—L/240Exterior walls:With plaster or stucco finishes—L/360—With other brittle finishes—L/240—With flexible finishes—L/120—Interior partitions:With plaster or stucco finishesL/360——With other brittle finishesL/240——With flexible finishesL/120——Farm buildings——L/180Greenhouses——L/120</table>

a. For structural roofing and siding made of formed metal sheets, the total load deflection shall not exceed L/60. For secondary roof structural members supporting formed metal roofing, the live load deflection shall not exceed L/150. For secondary wall members supporting formed metal siding, the design wind load deflection shall not exceed L/90. For roofs, this exception only applies when the metal sheets have no roof covering.

b. Flexible, folding and portable partitions are not governed by the provisions of this section. The deflection criterion for interior partitions is based on the horizontal load defined in Section 1607.15.

c. See Section 2403 for glass supports.

d. The deflection limit for the  \( D + (L + L_{r}) \)  load combination only applies to the deflection due to the creep component of long-term dead load deflection plus the short-term live load deflection. For lumber structural glued laminated timber, prefabricated wood I-joists, and structural composite lumber members that are dry at time of installation and used under dry conditions in accordance with the ANSI/AWC NDS, the creep component of the long-term deflection shall be permitted to be estimated as the immediate dead load deflection resulting from 0.5D. For lumber and glued laminated timber members installed or used at all other moisture conditions or cross laminated timber and wood structural panels that are dry at time of installation and used under dry conditions in accordance with the ANSI/AWC NDS, the creep component of the long-term deflection is permitted to be estimated as the immediate dead load deflection resulting from D. The value of 0.5D shall not be used in combination with ANSI/AWC NDS provisions for long-term loading.

e. The above deflections do not ensure against ponding. Roofs that do not have sufficient slope or camber to ensure adequate drainage shall be investigated for ponding. See Section 1611 for rain and ponding requirements and Section 1502.1 for roof drainage requirements.

f. The wind load shall be permitted to be taken as 0.42 times the "component and cladding" loads or directly calculated using the 10-year mean return interval wind speed for the purpose of determining deflection limits in Table 1604.3. Where framing members support glass, the deflection limit therein shall not exceed that specified in Section 1604.3.7.

g. For steel structural members, the detection due to creep component of long-term dead load shall be permitted to be taken as zero.

h. For aluminum structural members or aluminum panels used in skylights and sloped glazing framing, roofs or walls of sunroom additions or patio covers not supporting edge of glass or aluminum sandwich panels, the total load deflection shall not exceed L/60. For continuous aluminum structural members supporting edge of glass, the total load deflection shall not exceed L/175 for each glass lite or L/60 for the entire length of the member, whichever is more stringent. For aluminum sandwich panels used in roofs or walls of sunroom additions or patio covers, the total load deflection shall not exceed L/120.

i. l = Length of the member between supports. For cantilever members, l shall be taken as twice the length of the cantilever.

===== Page 1550 =====
TABLE 1604.5

RISK CATEGORY OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES

<table>RISK CATEGORYNATURE OF OCCUPANCYIBuildings and other structures that represent a low hazard to human life in the event of failure, including but not limited to:·Agricultural facilities.·Certain temporary facilities.·Minor storage facilities.IIBuildings and other structures except those listed in Risk Categories I, III and IV.IIIBuildings and other structures that represent a substantial hazard to human life in the event of failure, including but not limited to:·Buildings and other structures whose primary occupancy is public assembly with an occupant load greater than 300.·Buildings and other structures containing one or more public assembly spaces, each having an occupant load greater than 300 and a cumulative occupant load of these public assembly spaces of greater than 2,500.·Buildings and other structures containing Group E or Group I-4 occupancies or combination thereof, with an occupant load greater than 250.·Buildings and other structures containing educational occupancies for students above the high school with an occupant load greater than 500.·Group I-2, Condition 1 occupancies with 50 or more care recipients.·Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancies not having emergency surgery or emergency treatment facilities.·Group I-3 occupancies.·Any other occupancy with an occupant load greater than 5,000.·Power-generating stations, water treatment facilities for potable water, wastewater treatment facilities and other public utility facilities not included in Risk Category IV.·Buildings and other structures not included in Risk Category IV containing quantities of toxic or explosive materials that:·Exceed maximum allowable quantities per control area as given in Table 307.1(1) or Table 307.1(2) or per outdoor control area in accordance with SBC 801.·Are sufficient to pose a threat to the public if released.IVBuildings and other structures designated as essential facilities, including but not limited to:·Group I-2, Condition 2 occupancies having emergency surgery or emergency treatment facilities.·Ambulatory care facilities having emergency surgery or emergency treatment facilities.·Fire, rescue, ambulance and police stations and emergency vehicle garages.·Designated earthquake, hurricane or other emergency shelters.·Designated emergency preparedness, communications and operations centers and other facilities required for emergency response.·Power-generating stations and other public utility facilities required as emergency backup facilities for Risk Category IV structures.·Buildings and other structures containing quantities of highly toxic materials that:·Exceed maximum allowable quantities per control area as given in Table 307.1(2) or per outdoor control area in accordance with SBC 801.·Are sufficient to pose a threat to the public if released.·Aviation control towers, air traffic control centers and emergency aircraft hangars.·Buildings and other structures having critical national defense functions.·Water storage facilities and pump structures required to maintain water pressure for fire suppression.</table>

a. For purposes of occupant load calculation, occupancies required by Table 1004.5 to use gross floor area calculations shall be permitted to use net floor areas to determine the total occupant load.

b. Where approved by the building official, the classification of buildings and other structures as Risk Category III or IV based on their quantities of toxic, highly toxic or explosive materials is permitted to be reduced to Risk Category II, provided it can be demonstrated by a hazard assessment in accordance with Section 1.6.3 of SBC 301 that a release of the toxic, highly toxic or explosive materials is not sufficient to pose a threat to the public.

===== Page 1551 =====
TABLE 1607.1

MINIMUM UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED LIVE LOADS,  \( L_{0} \) , AND MINIMUM CONCENTRATED LIVE LOADS

<table><td colspan="3">CCUPANCY OR USEUNIFORM (kN/m²)CONCENTRATED (kN)ALSO SEE SECTION1.<td colspan="2">Apartments (see residential)———<td rowspan="2">2.<td rowspan="2">Access systemsOffice use2.59—Computer use59—3.<td colspan="2">Armories and drill rooms7.5b——<td rowspan="9">4.<td rowspan="9">Assembly areasFixed seats (fastened to floor)3a<td rowspan="9">—<td rowspan="9">—Follow spot, projections and control rooms2.5Lobbies5aMovable seats5aStage floors7.5bPlatforms (assembly)5aBleachers, folding and telescopic seating and grandstands5a (See Section 1607.19)Stadiums and arenas with fixed seats (fastened to the floor)3a (See Section 1607.19)Other assembly areas5a5.<td colspan="2">Balconies and decks1.5 times the live load for the area served, not required to exceed 100——6.<td colspan="2">Catwalks for maintenance and service access21.5—7.<td colspan="2">Cornices3——<td rowspan="2">8.<td rowspan="2">CorridorsFirst floor5<td rowspan="2">—<td rowspan="2">—Other floorsSame as occupancy served except as indicated9.<td colspan="2">Dining rooms and restaurants5a——10.<td colspan="2">Dwellings (see residential)———11.<td colspan="2">Elevator machine room and control room grating (on area of 50 mm by 50 mm)—1.5—12.<td colspan="2">Finish light floor plate construction (on area of 25 mm by 25 mm)—1—<td rowspan="2">13.<td rowspan="2" colspan="2">Fire escapes5<td rowspan="2">—<td rowspan="2">—On single-family dwellings only14.<td colspan="2">Fixed ladders<td colspan="2">See Section 1607.17—<td rowspan="2">15.<td rowspan="2">GaragesPassenger vehicles only2cSee Section 1607.7<td rowspan="2">—Trucks and busesSee Section 1607.8</table>

===== Page 1552 =====
TABLE 1607.1

MINIMUM UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED LIVE LOADS, L0, AND MINIMUM CONCENTRATED LIVE LOADS

<table><td colspan="2">CCUPANCY OR USEUNIFORM (kN/m²)CONCENTRATED (kN)ALSO SEE SECTION16.Handrails, guards and grab bars<td colspan="2">See Section 1607.9—17.Helipads<td colspan="2">See Section 1607.6—<td rowspan="3">18.<td rowspan="3">HospitalsCorridors above first floor44.5Operating rooms, laboratories34.5Patient rooms24.519.Hotels (see residential)———<td rowspan="3">20.<td rowspan="3">LibrariesCorridors above first floor44.5Reading rooms34.5Stack rooms7.5b4.5<td rowspan="2">21.<td rowspan="2">ManufacturingHeavy12b13.5Light3.5b922.Marquees, except one- and two-family dwellings4——23Mosques5b<td rowspan="4">24.<td rowspan="4">Office buildingsCorridors above first floor49File and computer rooms shall be designed for heavier loads based on anticipated occupancy——Lobbies and first-floor corridors59Offices2.59<td rowspan="2">25.<td rowspan="2">Penal institutionsCell blocks2<td rowspan="2">—Corridors5<td rowspan="5">26.<td rowspan="5">Recreational usesBowling alleys, poolrooms and similar uses4a<td rowspan="5">—Dance halls and ballrooms5aGymnasiums5aIce skating rinks12bRoller skating rinks5a<td rowspan="8">27.<td rowspan="8">ResidentialOne- and two-family dwellings:<td rowspan="8">—<td rowspan="8">—Uninhabitable attics without storage0.5Uninhabitable attics with storage1Habitable attics and sleeping areas1.5All other areas2Hotels and multifamily dwellings:Private rooms and corridors serving them2Public rooms and corridors serving them5</table>

===== Page 1553 =====
TABLE 1607.1
MINIMUM UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED LIVE LOADS, L0, AND MINIMUM CONCENTRATED LIVE LOADS

<table><td colspan="3">CCUPANCY OR USEUNIFORM (kN/m²)CONCENTRATED (kN)ALSO SEE SECTION<td rowspan="16">28.<td rowspan="16">RoofsOrdinary flat, pitched, and curved roofs (that are not occupiable)1—<td rowspan="16">Section 1607.14.2Roof areas used for assembly purposes5a—Roof areas used for occupancies other than assemblySame occupancy served—Vegetative and landscaped roofs:—Roof areas not intended for occupancy1—Roof areas used for assembly purposes5a—Roof areas used for other occupanciesSame occupancy served—Awnings and canopies:—Fabric construction supported by a skeleton structure0.25a—All other construction, except one- and two-family dwellings1—Primary roof members exposed to a work floor:Single panel point of lower chord of roof trusses or any point along primary structural members supporting roofs over manufacturing, storage warehouses, and repair garages—9All other primary roof members—1.5All roof surfaces subject to maintenance workers—1.5<td rowspan="3">29.<td rowspan="3">SchoolsClassrooms24.5<td rowspan="3">—Corridors above first floor44.5First-floor corridors54.530.Scuttles, skylight ribs and accessible ceilings—1—31.Sidewalks, vehicular driveways and yards, subject to trucking12b40Section 1607.20<td rowspan="2">32.<td rowspan="2">Stairs and exitsOne- and two-family dwellings21.5Section 1607.21All other51.5Section 1607.2133.<td colspan="2">Storage areas above ceilings1——<td rowspan="2">34.<td rowspan="2">Storage warehouses (shall be designed for heavier loads if required for anticipated storage)Heavy12b<td rowspan="2">—<td rowspan="2">—Light6.5b</table>

===== Page 1554 =====
TABLE 1607.1

MINIMUM UNIFORMLY DISTRIBUTED LIVE LOADS, L0, AND MINIMUM CONCENTRATED LIVE LOADS

<table><td colspan="3">CCUPANCY OR USEUNIFORM (kN/m²)CONCENTRATED (kN)ALSO SEE SECTION<td rowspan="4">35. StoresRetail:First floor54.5<td rowspan="3">—Upper floors44.5Wholesale, all floors6.5b4.536. Vehicle barriers<td colspan="2">See Section 1607.10—37. Walkways and elevated platforms (other than exitways)3——38. Yards and terraces, pedestrian5a——</table>

a. Live load reduction is not permitted.

b. Live load reduction is only permitted in accordance with Section 1607.12.1.2 or Item 1 of Section 1607.12.2.

c. Live load reduction is only permitted in accordance with Section 1607.12.1.3 or Item 2 of Section 1607.12.2.

TABLE 1607.12.1

LIVE LOAD ELEMENT FACTOR,  \( K_{LL} \)

<table><td colspan="3">ELEMENT\( K_{LL} \)Interior columns4Exterior columns without cantilever slabs4Edge columns with cantilever slabs3Corner columns with cantilever slabs Edge beams without cantilever slabs Interior beams222All other members not identified above including Edge beams with cantilever slabsCantilever beams One-way slabs Two-way slabs Members without provisions for continuous shear1transfer normal to their span</table>

TABLE 1609.3.1

WIND SPEED (M/S) CONVERSIONS \( ^{a,b,c} \)

<table>V4549545862.56771.57680.58585\( V_{asd} \)353841.545.148.255255.559626669</table>

a. Linear interpolation is permitted.

b.  \( V_{asd} \)  = Allowable stress design wind speed applicable to methods specified in Exceptions 1 through 5 of Section 1609.1.1.

c. V= Basic design wind speeds determined from Figure 1609.3(1) through Figure 1609.3(4).

===== Page 1555 =====
TABLE 1610.1

LATERAL SOIL LOAD

<table><td rowspan="3">DESCRIPTION OF BACKFILL MATERIALc<td rowspan="3">UNIFIED SOIL CLASSIFICATION<td colspan="2">DESIGN LATERAL SOIL LOADa<td colspan="2">(kN/m² per meter of depth)Active pressureAt-rest pressureWell-graded, clean gravels; gravel-sand mixesGW4.759.5Poorly graded clean gravels; gravel-sand mixesGP4.759.5Silty gravels, poorly graded gravel-sand mixesGM6.39.5Clayey gravels, poorly graded gravel-and-clay mixesGC7.19.5Well-graded, clean sands; gravelly sand mixesSW4.759.5Poorly graded clean sands; sand-gravel mixesSP4.759.5Silty sands, poorly graded sand-silt mixesSM7.19.5Sand-silt clay mix with plastic finesSM-SC7.115.7Clayey sands, poorly graded sand-clay mixesSC9.515.7Inorganic silts and clayey siltsML7.115.7Mixture of inorganic silt and clayML-CL9.515.7Inorganic clays of low to medium plasticityCL9.515.7Organic silts and silt clays, low plasticityOLNote bNote bInorganic clayey silts, elastic siltsMHNote bNote bInorganic clays of high plasticityCHNote bNote bOrganic clays and silty claysOHNote bNote b</table>

a. Design lateral soil loads are given for moist conditions for the specified soils at their optimum densities. Actual field conditions shall govern. Submerged or saturated soil pressures shall include the weight of the buoyant soil plus the hydrostatic loads.

b. Unsuitable as backfill material.

c. The definition and classification of soil materials shall be in accordance with ASTM D2487.

TABLE 1613.2.3(1)

VALUES OF SITE COEFFICIENT  \( F_{a} \)

<table><td rowspan="2">SITE CLASS<td colspan="6">MAPPED SPECTRAL RESPONSE ACCELERATION AT SHORT PERIOD\( S_{s} \leq 0.25 \)\( S_{s} = 0.50 \)\( S_{s} = 0.75 \)\( S_{s} = 1.00 \)\( S_{s} = 1.25 \)\( S_{s} \geq 1.5 \)A0.80.80.80.80.80.8B0.90.90.90.90.90.9C1.31.31.21.21.21.2D1.61.41.21.11.01.0E2.41.71.3Note bNote bNote bFNote bNote bNote bNote bNote bNote b</table>

a. Use straight-line interpolation for intermediate values of mapped spectral response acceleration at short period,  \( S_{s} \) . b. Values shall be determined in accordance with Section 11.4.8 of SBC 301.

TABLE 1613.2.3(2)

VALUES OF SITE COEFFICIENT  \( F_{a} \)

<table><td rowspan="2">SITE CLASS<td colspan="6">MAPPED RISK TARGETED MAXIMUM CONSIDERED EARTHQUAKE (MCER)\( S_{1} \leq 0.1 \)\( S_{1} = 0.2 \)\( S_{1} = 0.3 \)\( S_{1} = 0.4 \)\( S_{1} = 0.5 \)\( S_{1} \geq 0.6 \)A0.80.80.80.80.80.8B0.80.80.80.80.80.8C1.51.51.51.51.51.4D2.42.2 \( ^{c} \)2 \( ^{c} \)1.9 \( ^{c} \)1.8 \( ^{c} \)1.7 \( ^{c} \)E4.23.3 \( ^{c} \)2.8 \( ^{c} \)2.4 \( ^{c} \)2.2 \( ^{c} \)2 \( ^{c} \)FNote bNote bNote bNote bNote bNote b</table>

a. Use straight-line interpolation for intermediate values of mapped spectral response acceleration at 1-second period,  \( S_{1} \) .
b. Values shall be determined in accordance with Section 11.4.8 of SBC 301.

c. See requirements for site-specific ground motions in Section 11.4.8 of SBC 301.

===== Page 1556 =====
TABLE 1613.3.5(1)

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY BASED ON SHORT-PERIOD (0.2 SECOND) RESPONSE ACCELERATION

<table>VALUE OF SDs<td colspan="4">RISK CATEGORYI or IIIIIIVSDs &lt; 0.167gAAA0.167g ≤ SDs &lt; 0.33gBBC0.33g ≤ SDs &lt; 0.50gCCD0.50g ≤ SDsDDD</table>

TABLE 1613.3.5(2)

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY BASED ON 1-SECOND PERIOD RESPONSE ACCELERATION

<table>VALUE OF SD1<td colspan="4">RISK CATEGORYI or IIIIIIVSD1 &lt; 0.067gAAAA0.067g ≤ SD1 &lt; 0.133gBBC0.133g ≤ SD1 &lt; 0.20gCCD0.20g ≤ SD1DDD</table>

<table><td rowspan="2">Construction<td colspan="3">LOADSLWD + L<td colspan="4">SBC 201 TABLE 1604.3Roof membersl/360l/360l/240<td colspan="4">Concrete per SBC 304 See Table 24.2.2Flat roofsl/180Note aNote a</table>

a. No deflection limit specified in SBC 304.

FIGURE 1604.3.6.
CONCRETE ROOF MEMBER DEFLECTION CRITERIA

===== Page 1557 =====
FIGURE 1605.1(1)
EXAMPLES OF DISCONTINUOUS SHEAR WALLS

FIGURE 1605.1(2)
COLLECTORS

===== Page 1558 =====
<table>DescriptionUniform LoadWithout storage0.5 kN/m²With storage1 kN/m²Served by a stairway1.5 kN/m²</table>

FIGURE 1607.1(1)

SUMMARY OF MINIMUM LIVE LOAD REQUIRED IN UN-INHABITABLE ATTICS

FIGURE 1607.1(2)

DETERMINATION OF ATIC LIVE LOAD IN ACCORDANCE WITH TABLE 1607.1 FOOTNOTES I, J AND K

FIGURE 1607.9.1 HANDRAIL DESIGN LOAD

===== Page 1559 =====
FIGURE 1607.9.1.2
COMPONENT DESIGN LOAD

FIGURE 1607.10
VEHICLE BARRIER REQUIREMENTS

===== Page 1560 =====
FIGURE 1607.12.1
LIVE LOAD REDUCTION EXAMPLE

FIGURE 1607.14.1
PARTIAL LOADING

===== Page 1561 =====
FIGURE 1607.14.2.1

MINIMUM ROOF LIVE LOAD IN ACCORDANCE WITH EQUATION 16-9

FIGURE 1607.15

TOP-RUNNING BRIDGE CRANE

<table>DescriptionUniform LoadWithout storage0.5 kN/m²With storage1 kN/m²Served by a stairway1.5 kN/m²</table>

FIGURE 1607.22

SUMMARY OF MINIMUM LIVE LOAD REQUIRED IN RESIDENTIAL ATTICS

===== Page 1562 =====
FIGURE 1609.1(1)
WIND PRESSURES CAUSED BY EXTERNAL WIND FLOW

===== Page 1563 =====
FIGURE 1609.1(2)
OPENING IN EXTERIOR WALL OF BUILDING

===== Page 1564 =====
FIGURE 1609.1.1.1
WIND SPEED-UP EFFECT

FIGURE 1609.2
EFFECTS OF OPENINGS IN THE BUILDING ENVELOPE

===== Page 1565 =====
BASIC DESIGN WIND SPEEDS, V. FOR RISK CATEGORY II BUILDINGS, AND OTHER STRUCTURES

===== Page 1566 =====
BASIC DESIGN WIND SHELDS, Y, FOR RISKS CATCHER IN AND IN BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

1. 700-yr wind sheltered (pts. 3-sec) gulls

===== Page 1567 =====
BASIC DESIGN WIND SPEEDS: 3-6 M/S (3-6 M/S) AND OTHER STRICTURES

2.00° Full Wind Speed (m/s) 3-6 M/S (3-6 M/S)

===== Page 1568 =====
BASIC DESIGN WITH SPEEDS, Y FOR RISK CATEGORY 1 BUILDINGS, AND OTHER STRUCTURES

BASIC DESIGN WITH SPEEDS (M3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed (m3, 3-sec. girth)

300-yr. Wild Speed

===== Page 1569 =====
FIGURE 1611.1(1)
SECONDARY ROOF DRAINAGE NOT REQUIRED

<table><td rowspan="3">Drainage System<td colspan="11">Flow rate, Liters per second<td colspan="11">Depth of water above drain inlet (hydraulic head)2550657590100115125175200100 mm diameter drain5.110.711.4150 mm diameter drain6.312172434.1200 mm diameter drain7.914.521.435.353.669.473.8150 mm wide, channel scupper \( ^{b} \)1.13.2a5.7a8.8a12.220.224.8600 mm wide, channel scupper4.512.6a22.7a35.3a498199.2150 mm wide, 100 mm high, closed scupper \( ^{b} \)1.13.2a5.7a8.8a11.214.616600 mm wide, 100 mm high, closed scupper4.512.6a22.7a35.3a44.758.363.8150 mm wide, 150 mm high, closed scupper1.13.2a5.7a8.8a12.219.121.6600 mm wide, 150 mm high, closed scupper4.512.6a22.7a35.3a4976.586.6</table>

a. Interpolation is appropriate, including between width of each scupper

b. channel scuppers are open-topped (i.e. 3-sided). Closed scuppers are 4-sided.

FIGURE 1611.1(2)

FLOW RATE, IN LITER PER SECOND, OF VARIOUS ROOF DRAINS AT VARIOUS WATER DEPTHS AT DRAIN INLETS (mm)

===== Page 1570 =====
FIGURE 1611.1(3)
SEPARATE PRIMARY AND SECONDARY ROOF DRAINS

FIGURE 1611.1(4)
EQUATION 16-18 COEFFICIENT

===== Page 1571 =====
FIGURE 1611.1(5)
RAIN LOAD EXAMPLE

===== Page 1572 =====
S. RISK-TARGETED MAXIMUM CONSUMED EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION PARAMETER (% FOR 0.2 S SPECTRAL

RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5% OF CRITICAL DAMPLING), SITE CLASS B

© SBC 2011-CC-2024

===== Page 1573 =====
S.S. RISK-TARGETED MAXIMUM CONDITIONED EARTHQUAKE (MCR) GROUND MOTION PARAMETER (% FOR 0.2 S SPECTRAL RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5% OF CRITICAL DAMPLING), SITE CLASS B, NORTHERN SALTAR ABAL.

===== Page 1574 =====
S5 RISK TARGETED MAXIMUM CONSUMED EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION PARAMETER (% OF CRITICAL DAMPING), SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT DRILLABLE, RESPONSE ACCELERATION (5%) OF CRITICAL DAMPING, SITE CLASS B, SOUTHERN SALT D

===== Page 1575 =====
SIRSK: TARGETED MAXIMUM CONSECUTED EARTHQUAKE (MCEK) GROUND MOTION PATTERN (% OF CRITICAL DAMPLING), SITE CLASS B.

===== Page 1576 =====
SIRSK TARGETED MAXIMUM CONSUMERED EARTHQUAKE GROUND MOTION PARAMETER ( % ) FOR 1.5 SPECIRAL RESPONSE ACCELERATION ( % ) OF CRITICAL DAMPNG), SITE CLASS B, NORMAL SALT DAMAGE.

===== Page 1577 =====
S. RISK - TARGETED MAXIMUM CONSUMERED EARTHQUAKE (MCE) GROUND MOTION PARAMETER (% OF FOR 1.5 SPECIFICATIONAL ARRIVAL, RESPONSE ACCELERATION % OF CRITICAL DAMPNG), SITE CLASS, SOUTHEAST SALTAR ARABIA.

===== Page 1578 =====
100-YEAR, 1-HOUR RAINFALL (mm) OF SAUDI ARABIA

===== Page 1579 =====
FIGURE 1616.3
LONGITUDINAL, PERIMETER, TRANSVERSE AND VERTICAL TIES

===== Page 1580 =====
This page left intentionally blank

