===== Page 1280 =====
# CHAPTER 11—ACCESSIBILITY

## General Comments

Chapter 11 contains requirements for accessibility of buildings and their associated sites and facilities for people with physical disabilities. Existing building criteria are addressed in SBC 901 Section 306. Appendix E is included in the code to address accessibility for items in the 2010 ADA Standard that were not typically enforceable through traditional building code enforcement (e.g., beds, room signage).

SBC 1101/1102 references Chapter 11 for accessibility provisions. Therefore, this chapter may be applicable to housing covered under SBC 1101/1102 (see commentary, Sections 1108.6 and 1108.6.3). Structures referenced to Chapter 11 from SBC 1101/1102 would be considered Group R-3.

Section 1101 contains the broad scope statement of the chapter and identifies the baseline criteria for accessibility as being in compliance with this chapter.

Section 1102 provides a reference to the 2009 edition of ICC A117.1, Accessible and Useable Buildings and Facilities, which is the consensus national standard that sets forth the technical details, dimensions and construction specifications for accessibility.

Section 1103 describes the applicability of the provisions of this chapter. Accessibility is broadly required in all buildings, structures, sites and facilities. Those specific circumstances in which accessibility is not required (or is limited) are set forth as exceptions.

Section 1104 contains the requirements for interior and exterior accessible routes. An accessible route is a key component of the built environment that provides a person with a disability access to spaces, elements, facilities and buildings. Note that ramps are addressed in Section 1010.

Section 1105 contains requirements for accessible entrances to buildings and structures. Note that requirements for accessible means of egress are addressed in Section 1009.

Section 1106 sets forth the requirements for accessible parking facilities and passenger loading zones.

Section 1107 has criteria for car facilities other than parking, specifically, electrical vehicle charging stations and gas stations.
Section 1108 contains various accessibility requirements that are unique to occupancies that contain dwelling units and sleeping units and are applicable in addition to other general requirements of this chapter. Specific provisions unique to Group I and R occupancies are included.

Section 1109 contains various accessibility requirements that are unique to specific occupancies, other than Groups I and R, and are applicable in addition to all other general requirements of Chapter 11. Specific provisions unique to assembly seating, performance areas, dining areas, self-storage and judicial facilities are included.

Section 1110 contains various requirements that are applicable to features and facilities that are not occupancy related, including requirements for toilet and bathing facilities; sinks; kitchens and kitchenettes; drinking fountains; sauna/steam rooms; elevators; platform lifts; storage facilities; detectable warnings; seating at tables, counters and work surfaces; service facilities; controls and operating mechanisms; fuel dispensing systems; and gaming machines and gaming tables.

Section 1111 provides scoping for a variety of different types of recreational facilities. Basically all recreational facilities are required to have an accessible route to them. Section 1111.4 includes additional requirements specific to certain types of recreational facilities (e.g., pools, miniature golf courses) or exceptions (e.g., raised boxing rings, water slides and diving boards).

Section 1112 sets forth requirements for signage identifying certain required accessible elements or where communication must be offered by alternative means.

## Philosophy

The fundamental philosophy of the code on the subject of accessibility is that everything is required to be accessible. This is reflected in the basic applicability requirement (see Section 1103.1). The code's scoping requirements then address the conditions under which accessibility is not required in terms of exceptions to this general mandate. In the early 1990s, building codes tended to describe where accessibility was required in each occupancy, and any circumstance not specifically identified was excluded. The more recent codes represent a fundamental change

===== Page 1281 =====
in approach. Now one must think of accessibility in terms of "if it is not specifically exempted, it must be accessible."

Another important concept is that of "mainstreaming." There are many accessibility issues that not only benefit people with disabilities, but also provide a tangible benefit to people who do not consider themselves disabled, especially as the population ages. This type of requirement can be set forth in the code as generally applicable without necessarily identifying it specifically as an accessibility-related issue. Such a requirement would then be considered as having been mainstreamed. For example, the limitation on objects protruding into corridors, aisles and passageways (see Section 1003.3) is intended to aid people with a vision impairment by reducing the potential for unintended contact that may cause injury. Clearly, this has an additional safety benefit. A protruding object can be encountered by a person who is simply not paying close attention or is exiting a building during an event where smoke may obscure vision. The concept of mainstreaming is responsive to the desire of people with disabilities to not be singled out and categorized separately from the remainder of society. It is therefore important to recognize that, while the provisions of Chapter 11 are specifically grouped and identified as accessibility related, they do not represent all of the issues that must be taken into consideration when evaluating accessibility in buildings.

There are many items that have some basis in accessibility requirements, but actually result in more “user-friendly” buildings for all of us. Physical disabilities can be permanent or temporary; can affect all age groups; can involve all levels of abilities; and can range from persons with minor visual, hearing or mobility impairments to persons who are blind, deaf or confined to a wheelchair. Everyone will benefit from accessible features in buildings, either directly or indirectly. With some foresight in designing our built environment, access into and throughout buildings can be better for everyone throughout their lifetimes.

## Purpose

The purpose of this chapter is to set forth requirements for accessibility applicable to those elements of the built environment that are included within the scope of the code. There are two categories or types of requirements that must be addressed in order to accomplish accessibility: scoping and technical. Scoping requirements describe what and where accessibility is required, or how many accessible features or elements must be provided. For example, a requirement that at least one of the first 25 sleeping units in a hotel must be accessible is referred to as a scoping requirement because it describes what and how many accessible features are required. Another example of scoping is the exception for detached one- and two-family dwellings from accessibility requirements because it defines what is not required to be accessible. A technical requirement is intended to refer to a statement indicating how accessibility is to be accomplished. For example, a requirement indicating that in order for a parking space to be accessible, it must have a width of 2.5 m with an adjacent 1.5 m access aisle is considered a technical requirement. The provisions of Chapter 11 are scoping requirements in that they all address what and where accessibility is required or how many accessible elements are required. ICC A117.1 indicates how to make something accessible and is the consensus national standard that is referenced for establishing technical requirements. In addition to the provisions of Chapter 11, there are accessibility-related technical requirements elsewhere in the code. These are subject-matter-specific provisions that have been mainstreamed into the chapter or section of the code that deals with those subjects. As such, the code and its references regulate accessibility comprehensively by setting forth the scoping and technical requirements that establish the minimum level of accessibility required in the built environment.

## SECTION 1101 GENERAL

1101.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall control the design and construction of facilities for accessibility for individuals with disabilities.

This section establishes the scope of the chapter as providing for design and construction of facilities for accessibility for persons with a disability. The scope is broadly inclusive of all aspects of construction that affect the ability of people with disabilities to approach, enter and utilize a facility. The term "facility," as defined in Chapter 2, includes not only buildings and structures, but also the site on which they are located. Features of a site, such as parking areas and paths of travel from a public way to a structure, affect accessibility and are, therefore, within the scope of Chapter 11. Chapter 11, in conjunction with mainstreamed provisions throughout the code, sets forth scoping requirements.

## SECTION 1102 COMPLIANCE

1102.1 Design. Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to be accessible in accordance with this code and ICC A117.1.

===== Page 1282 =====
This section establishes the primary and fundamental relationship of ICC A117.1 to the code. The code text is intended to "scope" or provide thresholds for application of required accessibility features. The referenced standard contains technical provisions indicating how compliance with the code is achieved. In short, Chapter 11 specifies what, when and how many accessible features are required; the referenced standard indicates how to make that feature accessible. Compliance with both the code and the standard is required.

In accordance with Section 102.4, standards are utilized only to the extent that they are referenced. Note that ICC A117.1 includes technical criteria for several items that are not actually scoped in the code. Such items are not required to comply with ICC A117.1 criteria unless specifically scoped by the building official. Some examples of items in ICC A117.1 that are not referenced by the code are:

• Section 403.6 handrails

• Section 504 Stairways

• Section 507 - Accessible Routes through Parking

• Section 704 Telephones (scoped in SBC 201 Appendix E)

• Section 707 Automatic Teller Machines and Fare Machines (scoped in SBC 201 Appendix E)

• Section 802.11 Sign language interpreter stations

• Section 1105 - Type C (Visible) Units

Anthropometry is the study of dimensions and abilities of the human body. The Access Board funded a study by the Center for Inclusive Design and Environmental Access (IDeA), producing a 2010 report titled, Anthropometry of Wheeled Mobility Project. The result of the study indicated that the provisions in the 2009 edition of the ICC A117.1 did not address the needs of people using the full range of mobility devices. The 2017 ICC A117.1 was revised based on information from that study to address larger motorized wheelchairs and scooters.

Those revisions, which will affect the layouts of many spaces, include larger sizes required for turning spaces, clear floor space and maneuvering clearances; and new requirements for 90-degree turns on accessible routes. There are also new items that are scoped in the code, such as electrical vehicle charging stations (Section 1107) and classroom acoustics (Section 1207).

## SECTION 1103 SCOping
REQUIREMENTS

1103.1 Where required. Sites, buildings, structures, facilities, elements and spaces, temporary or permanent, shall be accessible to individuals with disabilities.

This section establishes the broad principle that all buildings, structures and their associated sites and facilities are required to be accessible to persons with disabilities. Such persons would include anyone who utilizes a space, including occupants, employees, students, spectators, participants and visitors. The approach taken by the code on the subject of accessibility is to require all construction to be accessible and then allow for the level of inaccessibility that is reasonable and logical. In codes created before the early 1990s, the approach was to list the conditions and occupancies to which the accessibility requirements applied. This is no longer practical, since the exceptions are far fewer than the circumstances to which accessibility applies. The 14 exceptions to this section, Sections 1103.2.1 to 1103.2.14 reflect the extent to which accessibility in construction is either exempted or reduced in scope.

1103.2 General exceptions. Sites, buildings, structures, facilities, elements and spaces shall be exempt from this chapter to the extent specified in this section.

Accessibility is generally applicable to all building sites and all spaces and elements within constructed facilities except as specifically exempted in the subsections to Section 1103.2. Note that many of the exceptions say "are not required to comply with this chapter." This means that not only are the areas themselves exempted, but also that an accessible route is not required to those elements.

1103.2.1 Specific requirements. Accessibility is not required in buildings and facilities, or portions thereof, to the extent permitted by Sections 1104 through 1112.

This section provides a reference to the various sections in Chapter 11 that identify when the intended number of accessible elements in various occupancies is less than 100 percent. The number of accessible fixtures and elements required by the referenced sections are deemed to provide adequate accessibility for those circumstances. For example, Section 1106 does not require all parking spaces in a parking facility to be accessible, Section 1108.6.1 does not require all sleeping units in Group R-1 to be fully accessible and Section 1110.13.1 does not require all check-out aisles to be accessible.

===== Page 1283 =====
1103.2.2 Employee work areas. Spaces and elements within employee work areas shall only be required to comply with Sections 907.5.2.3.1, 1009 and 1104.3.1 and shall be designed and constructed so that individuals with disabilities can approach, enter and exit the work area. Work areas, or portions of work areas, other than raised courtroom stations in accordance with Section 1109.4.1.4, that are less than 28 m \( ^{2} \)  in area and located 175 mm or more above or below the ground or finished floor where the change in elevation is essential to the function of the space shall be exempt from all requirements.

This section states that elements within individual work areas are not required to be fully accessible, but must be provided with accessible means of egress (see Section 1009) and accessible circulation paths (see Section 1104.3.1). In addition, these spaces must be provided with visible alarms (see Section 907.5.2.3.1). The assumption is that the employment non-discrimination requirements of the ADA will provide for "reasonable accommodations" to the disability of the employee and the area in which they work. In other words, employers will modify individual work areas for the specific requirements of the individual utilizing the space. An accessible route will be required to each work area. An example of this is an individual workstation in a laboratory. Installing sinks and built-in counters at accessible levels (see commentary, Sections 1110.3 and 1110.12) could make the station impractical for use by a person who is standing. Ergonomic researchers used to recommend a standing counter at a minimum of 900 mm but are now advising even higher counters to reduce fatigue. When a station is required to be adapted for an individual, it would be revised based on the individual's needs and abilities. An accessible route to each workstation in the laboratory would be required so that access to and from that station would be available. Note that the 900 mm clear width for the accessible route is the same as the minimum required width of an exit access aisle. For exceptions to the route to work areas, see Section 1104.3.1. There is an additional exception for work areas that are required to be raised or lowered 175 mm or more above the floor and have an area of less than 28 m \( ^{2} \) . The key word is "required" to be raised, not just that someone decided to make that workstation raised. Examples of work areas required to be raised would include an area around a metal stamping machine, a safety manager's observation station on a production line. Raised courtroom areas are specifically addressed in Section 1109.4.1.4. An example of a work area required to be

lowered might be a pit under a car in a car-repair station.

An employee's work area can be something as simple as an office or cubicle, or it can extend over a much wider area. For example, an office space might include copy rooms, file rooms, mail rooms, etc., or a nurse or doctor in a clinic would have part of their work area in each exam room as well as at a central station. In addition, not all employee-only spaces are considered work areas. Areas used by employees not for work (i.e., break rooms, bathrooms, corridors) would not fall under this exception (see the definition for "Employee work area").

1103.2.3 Detached dwellings. Detached one- and two-family dwellings, their accessory structures and their associated sites and facilities are not required to comply with this chapter.

This section exempts detached one- and two-family dwellings from accessibility requirements. The key word here is "detached." For example, a structure containing four or more dwelling units, even if the dwelling units are separated by fire walls, would still be required to be accessible as indicated in Section 1108.

Although one- and two-family detached dwellings are typically regulated by SBC 1101/1102, this exception in the code is still necessary. Single-family dwellings or duplexes that are four stories or higher would be designed and constructed under Group R-3 requirements of the code. SBC 1101/1102 references Chapter 11 of the code for accessibility requirements in Section 320. Those multiple-family structures with four or more dwelling units that qualify as townhouses or congregate residences with four or more sleeping units under SBC 1101/1102 are required to comply with the requirements for Group R-3 in Section 1108.6.3.

1103.2.4 Utility buildings. Group U occupancies are not required to comply with this chapter other than the following:

1 In agricultural buildings, access is required to paved work areas and areas open to the general public.

2 Private garages or carports that contain required accessible parking.

This section exempts Group U from accessibility requirements except as indicated, on the basis that such structures are a low priority when considering the need for accessibility. Areas in utility buildings that are required to be accessible would be paved work areas or areas open to the general public, such as if a farmer included a farmstand within his or

===== Page 1284 =====
her barn or buildings in which accessible parking spaces are located.

1103.2.5 Construction sites. Structures, sites and equipment directly associated with the actual processes of construction including, but not limited to, scaffolding, bridging, materials hoists, materials storage or construction trailers are not required to comply with this chapter.

This section exempts structures directly associated with the construction process because the need for accessibility on a continuous or regular basis in those circumstances is unlikely to arise. Portable toilets that are for the construction workers would also be exempted as part of this exception. Note that all structures that may be involved during a construction project are not exempt—only those specifically involved in the actual process of construction. For example, if mobile units are brought into house classrooms during a school addition, these classrooms must be accessible. A construction trailer that also serves as a sales office would also be required to be accessible.

1103.2.6 Raised areas. Raised areas used primarily for purposes of security, life safety or fire safety including, but not limited to, observation galleries, prison guard towers, fire towers or lifeguard stands are not required to comply with this chapter.

If there is a reason to elevate an area for concerns about security or safety, these areas are not required to be accessible (see Commentary Figure 1103.2.6).

1103.2.7 Limited access spaces. Spaces accessed only by ladders, catwalks, crawl spaces, freight elevators or very narrow passageways are not required to comply with this chapter.

Limited access spaces are considered areas where work could not reasonably be performed by a person using a wheelchair because of the physical requirements of the job activity. These areas are not required to be accessible.

1103.2.8 Reserved for numbering.

1103.2.9 Equipment spaces. Spaces frequented only by service personnel for maintenance, repair or occasional monitoring of equipment are not required to comply with this chapter.

Spaces that only contain heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), electrical, elevator, communication and similar types of equipment are considered areas where work could not reasonably be performed by a person utilizing a wheelchair because of the physical requirements of the job activity. Such spaces include, but are not limited to, elevator pits; elevator penthouses; mechanical, electrical or communications equipment rooms; piping or equipment catwalks; water or sewage treatment pump rooms and stations; electric substations and transformer vaults; and highway and tunnel utility facilities. These areas are not required to be accessible.

1103.2.10 Highway tollbooths. Highway tollbooths where the access is provided only by bridges above the vehicular traffic or underground tunnels are not required to comply with this chapter.

This section addresses facilities such as tollbooths, which are raised to facilitate access to higher vehicles as well as to provide protection from being struck by vehicles. Access to these spaces is often by tunnel or bridge. Similar facilities could also be addressed by Sections 1103.2.2 and 1104.3.1.

1103.2.11 Residential Group R-1. Buildings of Group R-1 containing not more than five sleeping units for rent or hire that are also occupied as the residence of the proprietor are not required to comply with this chapter.

This section exempts small bed-and-breakfast or transient boarding house facilities that are also the home of the owner. These types of facilities can be constructed using SBC 1101/1102 (see Section 101.2). SBC 1101/1102 also exempts these same facilities from accessibility in Section 320.

1103.2.12 Day care facilities. Where a day care facility is part of a dwelling unit, only the portion of the structure utilized for the day care facility is required to comply with this chapter.

When an adult day care or child day care facility is part of a person's home, the accessibility requirements are only applicable to the portion of the home that constitutes the day care facility, not the home itself. For other home-based businesses, see the discussion on live/work units in Sections 508.5 and 1108.6.2.1.

1103.2.13 Detention and correctional facilities. In detention and correctional facilities, common use areas that are used only by inmates or detainees and security personnel, and that do not serve holding cells or housing cells required to be Accessible units, are not required to comply with this chapter.

Section 1108.5.5 addresses where sleeping units, special holding or housing cells and medical care units in detention and correctional facilities are required to be accessible. If the purpose of any common or shared space is to serve only the associated cells that are not required to be accessible (e.g., shared bathrooms or living space serving a specific group of cells), then those common or shared spaces are not required to be accessible.

===== Page 1285 =====
1103.2.14 Walk-in coolers and freezers. Walk-in cooler and freezer equipment accessed only from employee work areas is not required to comply with this chapter.

Walk-in cooler and freezer equipment usually have features that make accessibility difficult. For thermal efficiency, such units may have raised floors, special door seals, unconventional door-operating hardware, tight internal storage, wheeled racking systems, etc. For these and other reasons they are not required to have an accessible entry or to be accessible within. Walk-in cooler and freezer equipment may also be considered exempted under Sections 1103.2.2 and 1104.3.1. Coolers that are accessed from the front by customers would need to comply with operable parts and display criteria on the public side (see Sections 1110.10.2 and 1110.15). By using the term “equipment,” this clarifies that this exemption is not intended to be used for large cooler or freezer rooms where employees work, such as in a meat packing plant.

## SECTION 1104 ACCESSIBLE ROUTE

1104.1 Site arrival points. At least one accessible route within the site shall be provided from public transportation stops, accessible parking, accessible passenger loading zones, and public streets or sidewalks to the accessible building entrance served.

Exception: Other than in buildings or facilities containing or serving Type B units, an accessible route shall not be required between site arrival points and the building or facility entrance if the only means of access between them is a vehicular way not providing for pedestrian access.

This section requires an accessible route from the point at which one enters the site to any buildings or facilities that are required to be accessible on that site. It is presumed that people with disabilities are capable of gaining access to the site from such locations as accessible parking, public transportation stops, loading zones, public streets or sidewalks. Due to possible limiting factors on site, at least one route from each arrival point, but not every route available, is required to be accessible. When not every route is accessible, good signage, while not required at site arrival points, would aid persons with mobility impairments in finding the routes without backtracking.

The exception addresses vehicular routes that provide the only route between an arrival point and an accessible entrance. An accessible route for pedestrian access is not required except in buildings or structures having or serving Type B units. For example, if there is a bus stop at the front of an industrial complex, but the only route to the building entrance is via a long driveway, an accessible pedestrian route to that entrance from the bus stop is not required. For special considerations in residential developments, see the commentaries to Sections 1108.4, 1108.7.4, 1108.7.5, and 1111.4.1.

1104.2 Within a site. At least one accessible route shall connect accessible buildings, accessible facilities, accessible elements and accessible spaces that are on the same site.

Exceptions:

1. An accessible route is not required between accessible buildings, accessible facilities, accessible elements and accessible spaces that have, as the only means of access between them, a vehicular way not providing for pedestrian access.

2. An accessible route to recreational facilities shall only be required to the extent specified in Section 1111.

Developments may include several buildings on the same site. This section requires an accessible route to all facilities offered on a site. Often sites are designed such that the only way to reach a building or facility is by automobile. If there are multiple, separated parking areas serving one or more buildings on a site, an accessible route is required between the parking facilities and the buildings they serve. If there is an exterior feature, such as a swimming pool, located on a site containing multiple buildings, an accessible route is required from each building to the swimming pool. For residential facilities, also see Section 1108.3.

Exception 1 clarifies that an accessible route is not required where no pedestrian access (i.e., sidewalk) is otherwise intended or provided to a particular building or feature on the site. For example, on a multi-building site with a road between and no sidewalks, it is not the intent to require a sidewalk be built strictly for accessible route requirements. If it is expected that everyone will drive between buildings, then accessible parking at each building is sufficient. Per Exception 2, for special considerations for the route to recreational facilities, see the commentary to Section 1111.

1104.3 Connected spaces. Where a building or portion of a building is required to be accessible, at least one accessible route shall be provided to each portion of the building, to accessible building entrances connecting accessible pedestrian walkways and to the public way.

===== Page 1286 =====
## Exceptions:

1. Stories and mezzanines exempted by Section 1104.4.

2. In a building, room or space used for assembly purposes with fixed seating, an accessible route shall not be required to serve levels where wheelchair spaces are not provided.

3. Vertical access to elevated employee workstations within a courtroom complying with Section 1109.4.1.4.

4. An accessible route to recreational facilities shall only be required to the extent specified in Section 1111.

This section requires that there be at least one route from an accessible entrance to all required accessible features within a building. If an area is addressed with a specific exception, then an accessible route is not required. For example, mechanical penthouses are exempt under Section 1103.2.9; therefore, an accessible route would not be required to this area.

Once someone gets into a space, they must also be able to evacuate in an emergency situation. This may or may not be via the same route. For accessible means of egress requirements, see Section 1009.

Exception 1 correlates with Section 1104.4 so that it is clear that the requirements for connecting spaces within a building are not intended to override the exception for an accessible route between stories and mezzanines.

Exception 2 reemphasizes that levels in assembly seating that do not contain wheelchair seating locations are not required to be accessed by an accessible route. However, the types of services available in the facility must be considered when determining what services must be available to accessible seats. A route is required to services from accessible seats in accordance with Section 1109.2.1.

Exception 3 is a pointer to the more specific criteria for courtroom workstations in Section 1109.4.1.4.

for information specific to recreational facilities.
1104.3.1 Employee work areas. Common

use circulation paths within employee work areas shall be accessible routes.

Exceptions:

1. Common use circulation paths, located within employee work areas that are less than 100 m \( ^{2} \)  in size and defined by permanently installed partitions, counters, casework or furnishings, shall not be required to be accessible routes.

2. Common use circulation paths, located within employee work areas, that are an integral component of equipment, shall not be required to be accessible routes.

3. Common use circulation paths, located within exterior employee work areas that are fully exposed to the weather, shall not be required to be accessible routes.

This requirement for common use circulation paths within employee work areas is consistent with the exception in Section 1103.2.2. An accessible route is required to each employee work area. When employees share work areas, an accessible route must be available throughout that area. Note that the accessible route minimum width of 900 mm clear is consistent with the minimum means of egress pathways.

Exception 1 addresses the accessible route within small employee work areas. Shared work areas that are less than 100 m² and confined by walls, partitions, permanently installed equipment, cabinets and counters are not required to have an accessible route through that particular area. The square meter limitation does not always pertain to a room, but also to part of a room. The intent was to allow such areas as the last two workstations down an aisle, two or three workstations in a small office, the employee side of a beverage bar, portions of commercial kitchens, etc. An accessible route is required to these areas, but not necessarily throughout the area. There can be multiple exceptions within the same area, such as in a commercial kitchen. Again, modifications would be performed at a later date based on employee needs.

Exception 2 permits non-accessible areas around and through pieces of equipment. An example would be the shared work areas around a piece of assembly equipment in a factory where one or more persons are required to monitor and operate the machine and incoming or outgoing product.

Exception 3 is an exception for outdoor work areas. This would be applicable to landscapers, sewer workers, gravel pit crews, etc.

1104.3.2 Press boxes. Press boxes in a building, room or space used for assembly purposes shall be on an accessible route.

Exceptions:

1. An accessible route shall not be required to press boxes in bleachers that have a single point of entry from the bleachers, provided that the aggregate area of all press boxes

===== Page 1287 =====
for each playing field is not more than 46 m².

2. An accessible route shall not be required to freestanding press boxes that are more than 3600 mm above grade provided that the aggregate area of all press boxes for each playing field is not more than 46 m².

Press boxes are required to be served by an accessible route. If the occupant load is five or less, this could be provided by a platform lift (see Section 1110.9, Item 3).

Exception 1 is mainly applicable to press boxes located at the back of the bleacher seating in an outdoor sports facility. The “single point of entry” refers to access to the press box directly from the bleacher seating (see Commentary Figure 1104.3.2).

Exception 2 is mainly applicable to the freestanding press box. If that press box is either less than 3600 mm above the ground or more than 46 m² in area, it must be served by an accessible route. Historically, the 3600 mm height limit was chosen because that was the maximum rise for a platform lift in previous editions of ASME A18.1.

For both exceptions, if one press box is provided, the total area of the press box must be less than 46 m². If more than one press box over-looks the same playing field, the aggregate area of both press boxes must be less than 46 m². The aggregate area is not intended to be applicable to press boxes that happen to be on the same multiple-facility site. For example, if a high school has a football field with two press boxes, the area of those two press boxes must be added together. However, if the same high school also has a press box for the baseball field, the area of the press box in the baseball field would not be included with the area of the press boxes in the football field. If a platform is provided on the roof for cameras, that area would be included in the square footage.

1104.4 Multistory buildings and facilities. At least one accessible route shall connect each accessible story, mezzanine and occupied roofs in multilevel buildings and facilities.

Exceptions:

1. An accessible route is not required to stories, mezzanines and occupied roofs that have an aggregate area of not more than 279 m² and are located above and below accessible levels. This exception shall not apply to:

1.1. Multiple tenant facilities of Group M occupancies containing five or more tenant spaces used for the sales or rental of goods and where at least one such tenant space is located on a floor level above or below the accessible levels.

1.2. Stories or mezzanines containing offices of health care providers (Group B or I).

1.3. Passenger transportation facilities and airports (Group A-3 or B); or

1.4. Government buildings.

1.5. Structures with 4 or more dwelling units.

2. Stories, mezzanines or occupied roofs that do not contain accessible elements or other spaces as determined by Section 1108 or 1109 are not required to be served by an accessible route from an accessible level.

3. In air traffic control towers, an accessible route is not required to serve the cab and the floor immediately below the cab.

4. Where a two-story building or facility has one story or mezzanine with an occupant load of five or fewer persons that does not contain public use space, that story or mezzanine shall not be required to be connected by an accessible route to the story above or below.

At least one accessible route is required between stories, mezzanines or occupied roofs in a facility. Other changes in level within a story are addressed in 1104.3. This requirement does not mandate an elevator. The accessible route between levels can be via ramps, platform lifts (where permitted), limited use/limited access (LULA) elevators, passenger elevators, etc. An occupied roof includes functional spaces for occupants, such as decks, pools or dining. A roof that, for example, merely offers stairway access to a mechanical penthouse would not be considered an occupied roof.

The exceptions are intended to allow limited areas to be inaccessible without restricting access to services available to the general public. It is important to note that the exceptions are just for the vertical portion of the route, not to any elements on the upper or lower levels. The intent is if an elevator or platform lift is installed in the future, the elements on those levels will already be accessible.

Exception 1 addresses conditions under which it may not be practical or economical to provide an accessible route in multistory buildings. The primary economic consideration is that, in the vast majority of circumstances, the means of providing an accessible route to stories above or below the entrance level of the building will be by an elevator. This exception applies to stories, mezzanines or occupied roofs above

===== Page 1288 =====
and below the entry level that have an aggregate area of 279 m² or less.

A mezzanine is required by Section 505.2 to have a clear height below of at least 2.1 m. Since the change in level is similar, for purposes of an accessible route, a mezzanine is addressed the same as a story. However, Exception 1 cannot be applied to platforms or raised or lowered floor areas on the same level. The 279 m² does not include the area of the accessible level. For example, if a building had a second floor that is 186 m² and a basement that is 186 m², since the aggregate area of the basement and second floor is 372 m², at least one of the two floor areas would be required to be connected to the entrance level by an accessible route.

There are certain facilities that, despite being relatively small in size, are not exempt from the requirement for an accessible route. Because of the critical nature of the services provided, offices of health care providers, passenger transportation facilities and airports are not included in this exception (Items 1.2 and 1.3). Multitenant mercantile occupancies with five or more tenants in the facility (Item 1.1), which include facilities such as shopping malls, are not included in the exception because individual retail stores have limited types of commodities (shoes, eyeglasses, sporting goods, etc.), and the exception would mean that people with disabilities would not have access to the same range of goods that are available to the general public. In these cases, access must be provided such that people with disabilities may patronize all the establishments within the facility. The 279 m² exception can be applied to a mercantile facility with fewer than five tenants, or where all tenants have space on an accessible ground level. Government buildings (Item 1.4), such as state or city office buildings, police stations, fire stations or schools, cannot use the 279 m² exception. This is intended to be consistent with what the ADA would refer to as a Title II building. Apartment buildings or townhouses that would be required to have Type B units (Item 1.5) should look at the specific requirements in Section 1108 for where an accessible route is not required. For example, because Section 1108.3 requires shared spaces that serve Type B dwellings to be accessible, a shared roof deck on an apartment building would have to have an accessible route to it. This is consistent with Exception 2.

Exception 2 is a direct reference to the specific items addressed in Sections 1108 and 1109. It is not a general exception for Groups A, I, R and S. The purpose of Exception 2 is to address areas within specific occupancies where a single element would be repeated multiple times on a level. Where Sections 1108 and 1109 would allow construction of a floor level with no accessible features, this section is not intended to trigger an accessible route to that otherwise inaccessible level. For example, an accessible route would not be required to upper levels in a hotel with all public spaces and all Accessible sleeping units (see Section 1108.6.1.1) located on the ground floor. Another example: Section 1109.2 requires wheelchair spaces on different levels, and access to all services. ICC A117.1 requires dispersion of the wheelchair space locations. Once those criteria are met, the tiers that do not contain wheelchair space locations or the associated services are not required to be served by an accessible route. This exception does not have a square footage limitation.

Exception 3 is specific to the unique situations found in air traffic control towers. Because air traffic control towers are required to have a 360-degree line of sight for air traffic safety, an elevator or the elevator penthouse cannot be located so that it could block the line of sight and create a safety issue.

Exception 4 permits small nonpublic second floors or mezzanines to not be served by an accessible route. An example would be the second floor in a doctor's office that is used only for storage. The occupant load table in Section 1004.1.1 would limit this storage area to 140 m² [i.e., 28 m² per occupant × 5 occupants maximum = 140 m²]. If the second floor also contained a mechanical room, that area would be exempt under Section 1103.2.9. However, if the doctor chose later to expand exam rooms into this second floor, he or she would have to provide an accessible route. Another example would be a second level in an airport that included only operational offices. In this case, the area would be limited by the occupant load table in Section 1004.1.1 to 45 m² [i.e., 9 m² per occupant × 5 occupants maximum = 45 m²]. While the exception is specifically stated as applicable only to second-story buildings or mezzanines, it could be interpreted to apply to a one-story building with a basement level.

1104.5 Location. Accessible routes shall coincide with or be located in the same area as a general circulation path. Where the circulation path is interior, the accessible route shall also be interior. Where only one accessible route is provided, the accessible route shall not pass through kitchens, storage rooms, restrooms, closets or similar spaces.

Exceptions:

===== Page 1289 =====
1. Accessible routes from parking garages contained within and serving Type B units are not required to be interior.

2. A single accessible route is permitted to pass through a kitchen or storage room in an Accessible unit, Type A unit or Type B unit.

One objective of accessibility requirements is to make facilities provided for persons with disabilities as commonplace in the built environment as those comparable facilities that exist for people without disabilities. In addition, this section prohibits the circumstance where an interior path between facilities is provided but the only accessible route between those same facilities is an exterior path.

When only one accessible route is provided, this section limits the types of spaces through which that accessible route may pass so that it is readily available. Spaces such as storage rooms, restrooms, closets and kitchens can be subject to being locked or their availability may be restricted to authorized personnel; therefore, they would not serve as reliable accessible routes for all building occupants. Exception 1 addresses individual dwelling units that include their own garages and residential facilities with shared garage levels. This exception is limited to accessible parking for Type B units. It is intended to allow a person to exit the garage and enter through the front door, instead of requiring access from the garage into the unit directly. Section 1106.3 requires that when parking is provided within a building, accessible parking must also be located within the building. If this exception is utilized in accordance with Sections 1104.1 and 1108.4, an accessible route must be provided from the accessible parking spaces to the front door.

Exception 2 allows a single accessible route to pass through a kitchen or storage room within a unit that is required to be an Accessible, Type A or Type B dwelling or sleeping unit. Given the space limitations and typical arrangements of dwelling units, it is not unreasonable to allow access, for example, through a kitchen, to reach an eating area or an exterior patio as the only means of access.

1104.6 Security barriers. Security barriers including, but not limited to, security bollards and security check points shall not obstruct a required accessible route or accessible means of egress.

Exception: Where security barriers incorporate elements that cannot comply with these requirements, such as certain metal detectors, fluoroscopes or other similar devices, the accessible route shall be permitted to be provided adjacent to security screening devices. The accessible route shall permit persons with disabilities passing around security barriers to maintain visual contact with their personal items to the same extent provided others passing through the security barrier.

This requirement provides guidance where a security feature is required along an accessible route. An example would be the security checkpoints in airports. The intent is that the route for a person with mobility impairments should move through security checkpoints as close to the typical route as possible. It is recognized that some people using wheelchairs or with braces could not move through standard security barriers, such as metal detectors.

## SECTION 1105 ACCESSIBLE ENTRANCES

1105.1 Public entrances. In addition to accessible entrances required by Sections 1105.1.2 through 1105.1.8, at least 60 percent of all public entrances shall be accessible.

Exceptions:

1. An accessible entrance is not required to areas not required to be accessible.

2. Loading and service entrances that are not the only entrance to a tenant space.

A facility is not accessible if the entrances into it are inaccessible. This section establishes reasonable criteria for providing accessible entrances. A facility is not required to have all of its entrances accessible in order to provide reasonable accommodation to persons with disabilities. If a facility has multiple public entrances, it is not considered unreasonable, as a minimum, to require at least 60 percent of the entrances to be accessible. In addition to the 60-percent overall requirements, entrances that have a specific function or provide access to only certain portions of the facility must be addressed (see commentaries, Sections 1105.1.2 through 1105.1.8). Sections 1112.1 and 1112.3 require signage at all entrances if all entrances are not accessible. "Public entrance," "Restricted entrance" and "Service entrance" are defined in Chapter 2.

When choosing which entrances should be accessible, the designer should consider the general circulation routes (Section 1104.5). For example, a hotel might have an entrance that is always open to the main lobby, while other entrances require a card key all or part of the time. The entrance to the main lobby should be one of the accessible entrances. Other buildings may have different entrances open at

===== Page 1290 =====
different times. A school might have entrances where the busses arrive open before and after school, the entrance at the principal's offices open during school hours, and entrances at the gym open in the evening for a basketball game. This may also help the designer choose which entrances should be accessible for the building as a whole.

Doors that are only for means of egress are not considered when determining the number of entrances required to be accessible. However, these doors may need to be on an accessible route for accessible means of egress requirements (see Section 1009). Depending on the arrangement, sometimes the entrance requirements are more restrictive, and sometimes the means of egress requirements are more restrictive. For example, take a small tenant space with two exterior doors—the front door is the public entrance and the back door is the service entrance. Section 1105.1, along with Exception 2, would require only the front door to be on an accessible route for ingress into the building. However, when a space has two means of egress required, Section 1009.1 would require both doors to be on an accessible route for means of egress purposes.

Exception 1 is self-evident in that if a facility or portion of a facility is not required to be accessible, then the entrances to such facilities or spaces are not required to be accessible. An example would be an exterior entrance to the sprinkler room (see Section 1103.2.9).

Exception 2 exempts loading and service entrances from the accessibility requirement on the assumptions that such entrances are unlikely to be used on a regular basis and may be raised to allow truck unloading. Loading and service entrances are required to be accessible if they are the only means of access into a facility or tenant space. This is consistent with Section 1105.1.5.

The reference to Sections 1105.1.2 through 1105.1.8 is intended to provide reasonable and convenient availability of an accessible entrance from the accessible facilities provided on the site. All entrances that serve distinct arrival points on the site are required to be accessible. For example, a public entrance from a public parking structure must be accessible (see Section 1105.1.2), as well as the employees-only entrance adjacent to separate employee parking (see Section 1105.1.3). This should deter the formerly common practice of designating an entrance as “the handicapped entrance” (which is inappropriate) without regard to its location relative to such arrival points as accessible parking facilities, transportation facilities, passenger loading zones, taxi stands, public streets or sidewalks and tunnels or elevated walkways. In conjunction with Section 1104.5, this section is also intended to provide reasonable and convenient availability of an accessible entrance to the building’s accessible entrance to the building’s accessible vertical movement elements, such as the elevators. This would allow a person with disabilities to move readily throughout all levels of the building.

1105.1.1 Automatic doors. In facilities with the occupancies and building occupant loads indicated in Table 1105.1.1, public entrances that are required to be accessible shall have one door be either a full power-operated door or a low-energy power-operated door. Where the public entrance includes a vestibule, at least one door into and one door out of the vestibule shall meet the requirements of this section.

It is important to note that this requirement is tied to all public entrances required to be accessible (i.e., at least 60 percent, per Section 1105.1). Having key-only access or employee-only access at a door does not make this a “restricted entrance” (see commentary, Section 1105.1.4).

A full power-operated door will open when a person approaches the door (see Section 1010.3.2 and BMHA A156.10). A low-energy power-operated door requires a person to push an activator button located near the door (see Section 1010.3.2, BMHA A156-19 and A156.38, and Commentary Figure 1105.1.1). See ICC A117.1 Section 404.3 for specific requirements. A power-assisted door is also considered a type of automatic door but is not an option to meet this requirement.

Per the table, only specific, fairly large occupancies are required to have a power-operated door at each accessible entrance. This is not required at other occupancies, but a building owner/designer may choose to install power-operated doors for customer convenience or operational considerations. For example, almost all grocery stores have automatic doors because customers are going in and out of the store with grocery carts.

If there are a group of doors at an entrance, only one door in the group has to have a power operator. However, if the entrance has a weather vestibule, one door on the exterior of the building and one door between the vestibule and the interior of the building must have a power operator.

This table is intended to specify which occupancies and at what size these facilities are required to provide power-operated doors. Some examples will be the best way to explain:

===== Page 1291 =====
An office building (Group B occupancy) with more than 500 occupants would be required to have power-operated doors at 60 percent of the public entrances.

A restaurant (Group A-3 occupancy) with more than 300 occupants would be required to have power-operated doors at 60 percent of the public entrances.

If a building has a restaurant with 50 occupants on the first floor and with business offices above with an occupant load of 260, power-operated doors would be required because note a requires mixed-use buildings to use the most restrictive occupant load.

If a building includes one of the occupancies in the table, and a different occupancy such as an apartment building over a store, only the occupant load of the store would be considered in determining if power-operated doors are required.

1105.1.2 Parking garage entrances. Where provided, direct access for pedestrians from parking structures to buildings or facility entrances shall be accessible.

Occasionally, a parking garage is attached to an office building or mall. An accessible route must be provided from the accessible parking spaces in that parking garage to an accessible entrance into the office or mall portion of the building.

1105.1.3 Entrances from tunnels or elevated walkways. Where direct access is provided for pedestrians from a pedestrian tunnel or elevated walkway to a building or facility, at least one entrance to the building or facility from each tunnel or walkway shall be accessible.

Elevated walkways are sometimes provided between adjacent buildings for easy access or protection from the weather for people who must commonly move between certain buildings. Tunnels may serve the same purpose. (see Commentary Figure 1105.1.3). When these types of walkways or tunnels are provided, at least one of the building entrances off of these walkways or tunnels must be an accessible entrance.

1105.1.4 Restricted entrances. Where restricted entrances are provided to a building or facility, at least one restricted entrance to the building or facility shall be accessible.

Where access into a specific entrance is controlled (see the definition for “Restricted entrance” in Chapter 2), at least one of that type of entrance must be accessible in addition to the public entrances required in Section 1105.1.
Restricted entrances are entrances that are restricted to certain occupancies on a controlled basis. This applies to those entrances where entry access is verified by security personnel and is strictly limited to certain occupants. Employee entrances requiring key or card access but lacking the level of security are not considered restricted entrances. Entrances used by the general public for entry into the building with security checkpoints inside the entrances are not considered restricted entrances.

1105.1.5 Entrances for inmates or detainees. Where entrances used only by inmates or detainees and security personnel are provided at judicial facilities, detention facilities or correctional facilities, at least one such entrance shall be accessible.

Where access to a specific entrance is limited for security reasons to inmates or detainees and the staff supervising them, that entrance must be accessible. This type of situation could occur at jails and police stations (see also Sections 1103.2.13, 1108.5.5 and 1109.4.2).

1105.1.6 Service entrances. If a service entrance is the only entrance to a building or a tenant space in a facility, that entrance shall be accessible.

Loading and service entrances are required to be accessible if they are the only means of access into a facility or tenant space. Typically, loading and service entrances are exempted from the accessibility requirement on the basis that such entrances are unlikely to be used on a regular basis and may be raised to allow for truck unloading (see the definition for "Service entrance" in Chapter 2). This is consistent with Section 1105.1, Exception 2.

1105.1.7 Tenant spaces. At least one accessible entrance shall be provided to each tenant in a facility.

Exception: An accessible entrance is not required to self-service storage facilities that are not required to be accessible.

Each tenant space must have at least one accessible entrance. For multiple-tenant buildings with shared entrances, the 60-percent entrance requirement in Section 1105.1 is also applicable. Per the exception, in a self-storage facility, the specific criteria in Section 1109.3 would allow for some of the self-storage facilities to not have an accessible entrance.

1105.1.8 Dwelling units and sleeping units. At least one accessible entrance shall be provided to each dwelling unit and sleeping unit in a facility.

===== Page 1292 =====
Exception: An accessible entrance is not required to dwelling units and sleeping units that are not required to be accessible units, Type A units or Type B units.

Dwelling and sleeping units that are Accessible, Type A or Type B units must have at least one accessible entrance. If a dwelling unit or sleeping unit does not have accessibility requirements, then an accessible entrance is not required to that unit. For multiunit buildings with shared entrances, the 60-percent entrance requirement in Section 1105.1 for the building as a whole would also be applicable.

## SECTION 1106 PARKING AND PASSENGER LOADING FACILITIES

1106.1 General. Parking shall comply with Sections 1106.2 through 1106.8. Passenger loading zones shall comply with Section 1106.9.

This section has separate pointers for parking spaces and passenger loading zones.

1106.2 Required. Where parking is provided, accessible parking spaces shall be provided in compliance with Table 1106.2, except as required by Sections 1106.3 through 1106.5. Where more than one parking facility is provided on a site, the number of parking spaces required to be accessible shall be calculated separately for each parking facility.

Exception: This section does not apply to parking spaces used exclusively for buses, trucks, other delivery vehicles, law enforcement vehicles or vehicular impound and motor pools where lots accessed by the public are provided with an accessible passenger loading zone.

Accessible parking facilities are an important component of building and site accessibility. This section addresses the number of parking spaces required. The location of such parking spaces in relation to accessible building entrances is addressed in Section 1106.7. Parking facility requirements are primarily intended to facilitate accessibility for people with mobility impairments, not just persons who use wheelchairs. This section is not intended to require that parking facilities be provided. Rather, when parking is provided, the minimum number of accessible parking spaces specified herein must be provided. ICC A117.1 contains detailed requirements on the size and configuration of accessible parking spaces, including the required access aisle adjacent to the space, as well as the dimensional requirements for van-accessible parking spaces required by Section 1106.6.
Multiple-tenant facilities, such as shopping malls, or large facilities, such as hospitals or assembly occupancies, may have multiple parking lots or parking garages. If multiple parking lots, or a combination of parking garages and parking lots are provided for a facility, the number of spaces in each separate parking facility is utilized to determine the number of accessible spaces required. Accessible car and van parking would then be provided in each parking facility accordingly, except as otherwise permitted by Section 1106.7. What constitutes multiple facilities or lots is somewhat subjective. Putting a line of trees or landscaping along the side of the parking spaces does not always constitute a separate facility. From a practical viewpoint, the separate facilities would serve specific groups of people (e.g., employee-only parking), provide different types of parking (e.g., surface lots, garage parking, covered parking) or serve distinct areas of the building (e.g., upper and lower levels as you move around a large mall). In certain types of lots, it is not logical to require accessible parking spaces. The exception helps to clarify these situations. Parking lots that contain only parking for buses, trucks and delivery vehicles would not need accessible parking spaces. Lots where the parked cars are limited to vehicles used by law enforcement, impound lots or motor pools are also not required to provide accessible spaces. An accessible passenger dropoff is required to be provided on the site, so that when a person with mobility impairments comes to that site, he or she has a place to exit the arrival vehicle safely and enter a vehicle coming from the lot.

The required number of accessible parking spaces is based on the accessible parking requirements of the 2010 ADA Standard. It does not reflect the demographic statistics on wheelchair usage that were used to scope other requirements in Chapter 11, because the majority of disabled parking permit and license plate holders in most states are ambulatory, mobility impaired persons. The required ratios are intended to be responsive to the anticipated demand for all facilities, such that accessible parking spaces will be reasonably available on demand. Section 1112.1 states that signage is not required on the one required accessible parking space when the total number of parking spaces provided is four or less. This could be burdensome for the building tenant in that the accessible parking space, which is restricted for use only by authorized vehicles, could constitute anywhere from 25 to 100 percent of the available parking. This may unduly restrict the availability of parking for all other vehicles and patrons of the facility. While

===== Page 1293 =====
not reserved by signage, the space must still be sized in accordance with a van-accessible space.

1106.3 Groups I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4. Accessible parking spaces shall be provided in Group I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 occupancies in accordance with Items 1 through 4 as applicable.

1 In Group R-2, R-3 and R-4 occupancies that are required to have Accessible, Type A or Type B dwelling units or sleeping units, at least 2 percent, but not less than one, of each type of parking space provided shall be accessible.

2 In Group I-1 and R-1 occupancies, accessible parking shall be provided in accordance with Table 1106.2.

3 Where at least one parking space is provided for each dwelling unit or sleeping unit, at least one accessible parking space shall be provided for each Accessible and Type A unit.

4 Where parking is provided within or beneath a building, accessible parking spaces shall also be provided within or beneath the building.

This section provides a separate criterion for the required number of accessible parking spaces for occupancies in Groups I-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 that include Accessible, Type A or Type B units.

The 2-percent requirement in Item 1 for R-2, R-3 and R-4 is based on HUD's FHAG. Section 1108.7 identifies buildings where Type A and Type B units may not be required. For example, a townhouse development may not have any Type A or Type B dwelling units required, therefore, no accessible parking spaces are required. Designers should keep in mind that asking for accessible parking spaces is a common accommodation asked for by residents in both townhouse and apartment developments. While not required, it would be good design practice to exceed code and at least have space on the parking lot to add accessible parking when requested.

Per Item 2, assisted living facilities (Group I-1) and hotels and motels (Group R-1) should use Table 1106.2 to determine the number of accessible parking spaces required.

Due to the higher anticipated need, per Item 3, when a residential parking lot provides one or more spaces for each dwelling or sleeping unit, there should be accessible parking spaces for each Accessible or Type A unit in the facility. Since Section 1108.6.2.2.1 requires 2 percent of all units in Group R-2 occupancies of more than 20 units to be Type A units, this might require more accessible parking spaces than Item 1 if an apartment building uses the exception for buildings with no elevator service (Section 1108.7.1). Item 1 and 3 are not additive, but the higher number of accessible parking spaces would be applicable.

Per Item 4, where parking is provided within or beneath a building, accessible parking spaces also are to be provided within or beneath the building. If a combination of surface and covered parking is provided, accessible parking may be provided in both locations. This is intended to establish consistency in the type and location of parking spaces available to all people. If parking is provided in individual private parking garages, 2 percent of the parking garages would have to contain accessible parking spaces (see the exception to Section 1106.6).

In a development, typically parking for dwelling units is considered on a site basis rather than a building-by-building basis. Accessible parking should be dispersed throughout the development so as to provide the best access possible. It is not the intent to require accessible parking spaces at the entrance to every building, or within every strip of parking garages. For example, it would not be logical to ask for a surface space and a garage space for each building in developments with multiple four-unit buildings. See Section 1106.6 for a discussion of the distribution of van-accessible spaces.

1106.4 Hospital outpatient facilities. At least 10 percent, but not less than one, of care recipient and visitor parking spaces provided to serve hospital outpatient facilities shall be accessible.

Certain facilities can be expected to have a higher demand for accessible parking spaces than that reflected in Table 1106.2. Medical outpatient facilities are one such type of facility. This section requires that at least 10 percent of the parking provided for patients and visitors of these types of facilities be accessible. Parking provided for the employees of these facilities should comply with Table 1106.2. If a hospital contains multiple clinics or types of facilities, the amount of parking dedicated to the outpatient facility is interpretive. Options for determining the number of accessible spaces could be based on the area percentage of the outpatient facilities to other facilities, or the anticipated number of patients and visitors to these facilities in relation to other facilities.

1106.5 Rehabilitation facilities and outpatient physical therapy facilities. At least 20 percent, but not less than one, of the portion of care recipient and visitor parking spaces serving rehabilitation facilities specializing in treating conditions that affect mobility and outpatient physical therapy facilities shall be accessible.

===== Page 1294 =====
Medical facilities that specialize in treatment or other services for people with mobility impairments can be expected to have a higher demand for accessible parking spaces. In these cases, at least 20 percent of the parking spaces provided for visitors and care recipients are required to be accessible. Parking provided for the employees of these facilities should comply with Table 1106.2. If a hospital contains multiple types of facilities, the amount of parking dedicated to the rehabilitation and physical therapy facility is interpretive. Options for determining the number of accessible spaces could be based on the area percentage of the rehabilitation and physical therapy facilities to other facilities or the anticipated number of care recipients and visitors to these facilities in relation to other facilities.

1106.6 Van spaces. For every six or fraction of six accessible parking spaces, at least one shall be a van-accessible parking space.

Exception: In Group U private garages that serve Group R-2 and R-3 occupancies, van accessible spaces shall be permitted to have vehicular routes, entrances, parking spaces and access aisles with a minimum vertical clearance of 2100 mm.

Vans that are specially equipped to accommodate a person using a wheelchair require wider parking spaces than the typical accessible parking space. This is because vans are usually equipped with a mechanized loading/unloading platform that extends outward from the passenger side of the vehicle. ICC A117.1 contains the dimensional requirements for van-accessible spaces. In order to accommodate the growing usage of these specially equipped vans, this section requires that one in every six accessible parking spaces, or a fraction thereof, be of a size to accommodate these vans. The requirement for van accessible spaces is not intended to require a greater number of accessible spaces than required by Table 1106.2. For example, if Table 1106.2 requires six accessible parking spaces, one of those six must be van accessible. If seven accessible spaces are required by Table 1106.2, two of those seven are required to be van accessible. On the other hand, if only one accessible parking space is required by Table 1106.2, that space would be a van-accessible space.

The exception modifies the height criteria for van-accessible spaces in ICC A117.1 for private garages serving dwelling units. (See Section 406.3 for the criteria for what can be considered a Group U private garage.) This is a reduction from the 2500 mm height requirement in ICC A117.1. Since many vans are now converted by lowering the floor rather than raising the roof, the 2050 mm height should accommodate most private passenger vans with lifts.

Note that the determination of the number of van-accessible spaces is not tied to separate facilities as the number of spaces is in Sections 1106.2 and 1106.3. However, distribution of van-accessible spaces throughout the accessible parking space in large facilities is good design practice. Van-accessible spaces can be used by cars with accessible placards. It is just common courtesy to leave the van-accessible space for vans when there are other accessible spaces available. However, the van space is not reserved for vans only; in small parking lots the van space may be the only accessible parking provided.

1106.7 Location. Accessible parking spaces shall be located on the shortest accessible route of travel from adjacent parking to an accessible building entrance. In parking facilities that do not serve a particular building, accessible parking spaces shall be located on the shortest route to an accessible pedestrian entrance to the parking facility. Where buildings have multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking, accessible parking spaces shall be dispersed and located near the accessible entrances.

## Exceptions:

1. In multilevel parking structures, van-accessible parking spaces are permitted on one level.

2. Accessible parking spaces shall be permitted to be located in different parking facilities if substantially equivalent or greater accessibility is provided in terms of distance from an accessible entrance or entrances, parking fee and user convenience.

As previously stated, the majority of disabled parking permits and license plate holders in most states are ambulatory, mobility-impaired persons. Travel distance, as well as severe weather conditions encountered when traversing from the parking lot to the building entrance, are more difficult for persons with mobility impairments to deal with than the general population. This section requires that parking be configured such that people utilizing accessible parking spaces have to travel a minimum distance to an accessible entrance (see Commentary Figure 1106.7). This requirement is stated in performance terms and requires a degree of subjective judgment on the part of both the designer and the building official in determining the appropriate location for accessible spaces that meets the

===== Page 1295 =====
intent of this section. If a facility has multiple accessible entrances, accessible parking spaces are to be dispersed consistent with the location of these entrances.

Exception 1 is intended to acknowledge a practical difficulty associated with multilevel parking structures. In many cases, a multilevel parking structure will serve accessible building entrances on more than one or all of its parking levels. Vans equipped to transport multiple persons using wheelchairs may be modified by raising the roof of the vehicle in order to provide greater interior headroom. Consequently, such vans require greater vertical clearances. Typical parking structure design may not easily accommodate the necessary vertical clearance for accessible vans due to their low floor-to-ceiling heights. It would be impractical and economically unjustified to require parking structures to be designed solely for the purpose of enabling van-accessible spaces to be located on upper levels. Accordingly, the exception allows the required van-accessible parking spaces to be located on only one level of a multilevel parking structure. The route to and from the space, as well as at the van space and associated access aisle, must meet the minimum clear height of 2500 mm as specified in Section 502.6 of ICC A117.1. This will usually be the entry level of the parking facility. While directional signage is not required, best practice would be to indicate the routes in and out for someone who has a vehicle where the headroom height may be an issue.

has a remote parking garage, and a surface lot close to an accessible entrance, it can be argued that the shorter route provides a higher level of access. Therefore, all or a portion of the accessible spaces could be located on the

1106.8 Parking meters and pay stations. Where parking meters and pay stations serve accessible parking spaces, such parking meters and pay stations shall be accessible.
ICC A117.1 Section 502.10 includes technical provisions for parking meters and pay stations where they are associated with the accessible parking space. As an accessible element, pay stations associated with accessible parking spaces must be on an accessible route from the accessible parking space. Parking meters are expected to be at the front of the parking space. While access directly from access aisle is preferred, technically an accessible route to the parking meter does not have to be directly from the access aisle.

1106.9 Passenger loading zones. Passenger loading zones shall be accessible.

This section does not require passenger loading zones to be provided; however, where provided, they must be accessible in accordance with Section 503 of ICC A117.1. For locations where passenger loading zones are required, see Sections 1106.9.1 through 1106.9.4.

1106.9.1 Continuous loading zones. Where passenger loading zones are provided, one passenger loading zone in every continuous 30 m maximum of loading zone space shall be accessible.

This section is intended to address the continuous loading zones found at most larger airports as well as some other types of transportation facilities, such as commuter train "kiss-n-ride" drop-off areas. At least one 6 m section for every 30 m of passenger loading zone must meet the accessibility provisions in Section 503 of ICC A117.1.

1106.9.2 Medical facilities. A passenger loading zone shall be provided at an accessible entrance to licensed medical and long-term care facilities where people receive physical or medical treatment or care and where the period of stay exceeds 24 hours.

The requirement for accessible passenger loading zones is applicable to both medical and long-term care facilities. The most common examples are hospitals and nursing homes (Group I-2). Medical and long-term care facilities typically have a higher percentage of people with mobility impairments living in the facility or visiting on a regular basis. Because of their mobility impairments, some people will be driven by a friend or family member, and it is desirable and convenient to first drop them off at the entrance and then park, rather than first parking and then requiring travel from the parking lot to the facility's entrance. As such, this section requires that a passenger loading zone be provided at not fewer than one accessible entrance to the facility.

Assisted living facilities do not offer medical care, so they are not required to provide a passenger loading zone; however, in a Group I-1, Condition 2 facility this might be a best practice based on the needs of the residents.

1106.9.3 Valet parking. A passenger loading zone shall be provided at valet parking services.

Valet parking is typically the public access point to a facility. When valet parking is

===== Page 1296 =====
provided, the passenger loading zone must be accessible so that it may be utilized by persons requiring wheelchairs. This would include the access aisle and an accessible route from the access aisle to the front entrance. Note that providing valet parking services does not eliminate the need for accessible parking spaces where parking is provided. Some vehicles that are modified for persons with disabilities may not be drivable by a valet attendant. In addition, valet parking may only be provided during certain periods of time, such as during dinner hours at a restaurant.

1106.9.4 Mechanical access parking garages. Mechanical access parking garages shall provide at least one passenger loading zone at vehicle drop-off and vehicle pick-up areas.

Mechanical parking garages allow a much higher density of vehicles in a given footprint because of the elimination of ramps and drive lanes. With respect to the customer interface, mechanical garages are similar to valet parking and, therefore, require similar scoping for accessibility.

## SECTION 1107 MOTOR VEHICLE RELATED FACILITIES

1107.1 General. Electrical vehicle charging stations shall comply with Section 1107.2. Fuel-dispensing systems shall comply with Section 1107.3.

This section contains separate criteria for accessible vehicle spaces at electric vehicle charging stations and for fuel dispensers (gas pumps) at filling stations and similar places.

1107.2 Electrical vehicle charging stations. Electrical vehicle charging stations shall comply with Sections 1107.2.1 and 1107.2.2.

Exception: Electrical vehicle charging stations provided to serve Groups R-2, R-3 and R-4 occupancies are not required to comply with this section.

Electric vehicle charging stations have become more commonplace in recent years and are likely to become even more prevalent as our nation reduces its dependence on carbon fuels. Beyond the advantages they offer all consumers, electric vehicles provide people with disabilities many features that could be considered accessibility options, such as: keyless operation; different door locations and arrangements; more interior space to accommodate drivers and passengers with their mobility devices; and, of course, plug-in fueling that often can be done at home. For all these reasons, it is important to build in accessibility during installation, rather than to have to remove barriers to these charging stations later.
The exception for R-2, R-3 and R-4 occupancies recognizes that EV charging equipment provided in such facilities is often supplied for the resident in their assigned parking space or by a vehicle charging station unlike those typically seen in a parking lot. If EV charging stations are provided by the owner or operator of residential facilities, they would be subject to requirements for reasonable accommodations or modifications, as such, any necessary changes would be tailored to the specific disability-related needs of the individuals making such requests.

1107.2.1 Number of accessible vehicle spaces. Not less than 5 percent of vehicle spaces on the site served by electrical vehicle charging systems, but not fewer than one for each type of electric vehicle charging system, shall be accessible.

Section 1107.2.1 bases the number of accessible vehicle spaces required (5 percent) on the total number of vehicle spaces provided at all EV charging stations on a site. This also allows all of the accessible EV charging stations to be grouped together at a single location, thereby reducing the impact of the accessible route requirement in Section 1104.2.

This section also requires at least one of each "type" of charging station to be accessible. Currently, factors that may distinguish one type of nonresidential charging station from another include but are not limited to: the type of power supply; the vehicle charging time; and point-of-sale, communications, and diagnostic capabilities. Other factors, such as branding, advertising, and installation method (wall versus pedestal mount) would not normally be considered. Where one accessible vehicle space serves multiple types of EV charging stations, additional vehicle spaces would not be needed to meet this requirement.

1107.2.2 Vehicle space size. Accessible vehicle spaces shall comply with the requirements for a van accessible parking space that is 3300 mm minimum in width with an adjoining access aisle that is 1500 mm minimum in width.

This section requires the accessible vehicle space at an EV charging station to be sized the same as a van accessible parking space. Although ICC A117.1 allows an option to provide a narrower parking space with a wider access aisle, Section 1107.2.2 specifies that the vehicle space must be at least 3300 mm in width and have an adjacent access aisle at least 1500 mm in width. This requirement affords more space around both sides of a vehicle and will facilitate connection of the power supply to the vehicle port. The

===== Page 1297 =====
provisions for electric vehicle charging stations in ICC A117.1 Section 502.11 contain additional technical requirements for the operable parts, accessible routes, and prohibited obstructions at accessible EV charging stations.

Note that while the accessible electric vehicle charging station is required to be sized like a van accessible parking space, it is not required to be signed or reserved for accessible vehicles. It is assumed that people will recognize the similarity and take that space last.

## 1107.3 Fuel-dispensing systems. Fuel-dispensing systems shall be accessible.

With the exceptions specific to fuel-dispensing systems (e.g., gas pumps) in ICC A117.1 under “operable parts,” this section asks for operable parts to be within the unobstructed reach range provisions in ICC A117.1. Because of safety concerns, these operable parts do not have to meet the 22.25 N requirement. Basically, all operable parts (e.g., pump controls, credit card readers, receipt dispensers, etc.) must be located between 375 mm and 1200 mm above the parking surface. Curbs must be considered when determining the height of controls. The intent is to address the needs of persons with limited reach range. Fuel-dispensing systems that are part of a workstation are exempted by Section 1103.2.2.

## SECTION 1108 DWELLING UNITS AND SLEEPING UNITS

The development of this section was part of the coordination effort with the FHA and the FHAG. For further explanation, see the general comments for this chapter.

One of the phrases developed as part of this coordination was the defined phrase “Intended to be occupied as a residence.” This defines a type of dwelling or sleeping unit that is a person’s home or place of abode. This language is intended to clarify that, consistent with the FHA, all dwelling units or sleeping units that can or will be used as a place of abode—even for a short period of stay—must meet the requirements for Type B dwellings. There is a presumption in the code that if a building is nontransient (i.e., occupies stay more than 30 days), it is covered by the requirements in this section. In addition, in coordination with the FHA, occupancies that allow stays of fewer than 30 days may be required to meet Type B design and construction requirements.

Accordingly, this commentary will provide guidance for determining when short-term occupancies that might not typically be viewed as housing are covered by this section. Such short-term Group R occupancies may include residential hotels and motels; corporate housing; seasonal vacation units; time-shares; boarding houses; dormitories and migrant farmworker housing. Also included are some occupancies in Group I, such as nursing homes, assisted living facilities, hospices and homeless shelters.

The key factor in determining whether any of these occupancies are subject to Type B requirements are whether the occupant will have the right to return to the property and whether he or she would have anywhere else to which to return. If it is intended that an occupant will have a right to return to the property and will not have anywhere else to return, the unit is "intended to be occupied as a residence" and must meet the Type B requirements regardless of the length of stay. Additionally, nursing homes in which a resident move after vacating his or her primary residence are subject to Type B requirements.

If the occupants have a right to return to the property but also have another place to which to return, the unit may still be subject to Type B criteria. Additional factors must be considered to determine whether the property is a short-term dwelling or sleeping unit that must meet Type B criteria, or a transient property that is not required to comply with Type B criteria. These factors must be considered by owners, builders, developers, architects and other designers to determine whether a building must be designed and constructed in accordance with Type B unit requirements.

For additional discussion on the elements related to hotels, motels, corporate housing and seasonal vacation units and time-shares, see the commentary to Section 1108.6.1 (Group R-1). With respect to most other occupancies, the following factors are also relevant to determine whether the units are subject to Type B requirements:

1 Whether the property is to be marketed as short-term housing.

2 Whether the terms and length of occupancy will be established through a written agreement.

3 How payment will be calculated (e.g., on a daily, weekly, monthly or yearly basis).

4 What types of amenities and services are offered with the occupancy.

For example, an assisted living facility that provides sleeping units and custodial services to its occupants, and bills them on a monthly basis, is subject to Type B design and construction requirements. In addition, housing for migrant farm workers that is provided in conjunction with the worker's employment (whether or not rent is paid) and contains amenities for cooking and sleeping would be subject to Type B criteria.

===== Page 1298 =====
1108.1 General. In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, occupancies having dwelling units or sleeping units shall be provided with accessible features in accordance with this section.

There are two basic types of facilities that this section covers: dwelling units and sleeping units. A "Dwelling unit" is defined in Chapter 2 as a single unit that contains permanent provisions for "living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation." A "Sleeping unit" is defined in Chapter 2 as a room in which people sleep that can include some of the provisions found in a dwelling unit but not all. Occupancy of dwelling units or sleeping units can be transient or non-transient. Dwelling units are typically apartments, condominiums, detached homes or townhouses. Dwelling units can be located in hotels that offer cabins, suites or rooms with kitchen facilities. Bedrooms within dwelling units are not considered sleeping units.

The definition for “Sleeping unit” is intended to clarify the differences between sleeping units and dwelling units. In addition, using the term “sleeping unit” for spaces where people sleep will replace a multitude of other terms (i.e., patient room, cell, guestroom) so that there is consistent application across occupancies. Some examples of sleeping units are hotel guestrooms; bedrooms in different types of larger congregate living facilities; patient sleeping rooms in hospitals or nursing homes; or housing cells in a jail. Another example would be a studio unit with a kitchenette (i.e., countertop microwave, sink, refrigerator). Since the cooking arrangements are not the traditional permanent appliances (i.e., a range), this configuration would be considered a sleeping unit, and not a dwelling unit.

The new style of dormitory in colleges consists of two, three or four bedrooms with one or two single occupant bathrooms and a shared living space. These groups of rooms are considered a sleeping unit. Only where there are full cooking and eating facilities (i.e., kitchen with a range) within the unit, is the unit considered a dwelling unit. The two-, three- or four-bedroom units operate similar to an apartment. Considering this group of rooms a sleeping unit clarifies that the provisions in Chapter 7 to separate dwelling or sleeping units allows for this group of rooms to be separated from adjacent groups and the corridors, but does not require the bedrooms to be separated from the associated living room or bathrooms. This also clarifies that only the main corridors have fire alarms, and smoke detectors can be within the unit. Due to how universities administer dormitory assignments, the accessibility provisions in Section 1108 specify that bedrooms within sleeping units are counted separately to determine the number of Accessible bedrooms required.

The current definition for sleeping unit does not set a limit on the number of occupants in a sleeping unit. However, for consistency with the application of provisions in Groups I-1, I-2, R-1 and R-2, and where similar facilities are permitted to comply with R-3 provisions (i.e., 16 or fewer occupants for nontransient R-2, 10 or fewer occupants for transient R-1, five or fewer occupants for Groups I-1 and I-2), there is an implied transition on where these units are considered operating as a single unit rather than separate units with shared spaces.

Dwelling units also do not have a set limit on size; however, congregate residences in both Groups R-3 and R-4 are 16 or fewer occupants. Since a family cannot be defined by blood or marriage, this could be considered a reasonable limit to consider when the occupants live more as a group rather than separate units.

1108.2 Design. Dwelling units and sleeping units that are required to be Accessible units, Type A units and Type B units shall comply with the applicable portions of Chapter 11 of ICC A117.1. Units required to be Type A units are permitted to be designed and constructed as Accessible units. Units required to be Type B units are permitted to be designed and constructed as Accessible units or as Type A units.

There are three levels of accessibility that can be required in a dwelling unit or sleeping unit: Accessible units, Type A units and Type B units. All three types are defined in Chapter 2. In short, Accessible units are constructed wheelchair ready. Type A units are wheelchair friendly. Type B units are wheelchair usable. An Accessible unit is constructed for full accessibility in accordance with Section 1002 of ICC A117.1. For example, grab bars are in place in the bathrooms, a clear floor space is provided for front approach at the kitchen sink and bathroom lavatories, 810 mm clear width doors with maneuvering clearances and lever hardware are provided, etc. None of the elements in the unit are constructed for adaptability. The requirements for an Accessible unit provide a higher level of accessibility than either a Type A unit or a Type B unit.

A Type A unit has some elements that are constructed accessible [e.g., 810 mm clear width doors with maneuvering clearances and lever hardware] and some elements designed to be added or altered when needed (e.g., grab bars can be easily added in bathrooms since blocking in the walls is in place). Type A units

===== Page 1299 =====
follow the technical criteria in Section 1003 of ICC A117.1. This type of unit is less accessible than an Accessible unit and more accessible than a Type B unit.

The scoping or technical requirements for Type B units are consistent with the requirements for units required by the FHAG (see the definition for "Type B units" in Chapter 2). A Type B unit is constructed to a lower level of accessibility than either an Accessible unit or a Type A unit. While a person who uses a wheelchair could maneuver in a Type B unit, the technical requirements are geared more toward persons with lesser mobility impairments. Type B units follow the technical requirements in Section 1004 of ICC A117.1. Areas of a Type B unit are allowed to be totally non-accessible (e.g., sunken living room, extra bedrooms on a mezzanine level). Side approach is permitted to sinks in the kitchen and lavatories in the bathroom rather than planning for a front approach. Some elements are constructed with a minimal level of accessibility [e.g., doors within the unit have a 810 mm clear width but do not require maneuvering clearances], while some elements are designed to be altered when needed (e.g., blocking in the walls of the bathroom for future installation of grab bars).

The technical criteria for each type of unit in ICC A117.1 is organized in the same order and section number for each element, making comparisons between types easier. For example, looking at the door provisions in Sections 1102.5, 1103.5 and 1104.5 of ICC A117.1 would clarify that the maneuvering clearances are required at all doors that are part of the accessible route through an Accessible unit or a Type A unit, but for the Type B unit, the maneuvering clearance is only required at the front door to the unit, not doors within the unit. Another example would be the requirements for operable parts: Sections 1102.9 and 1103.9 address requirements for plumbing fixture and appliance controls, while in accordance with Section 1104.9, Type B units do not require plumbing fixture and appliance controls to meet operable parts requirements.

1108.3 Accessible spaces. Rooms and spaces available to the general public or available for use by residents and serving Accessible units, Type A units or Type B units shall be accessible. Accessible spaces shall include toilet and bathing rooms, kitchen, living and dining areas and any exterior spaces, including patios, terraces and balconies.

Exceptions:

1. Stories and mezzanines exempted by Section 1108.4.
2. Recreational facilities in accordance with Section 1111.2.

3. Exterior decks, patios or balconies that are part of Type B units and have impervious surfaces, and that are not more than 100 mm below the finished floor level of the adjacent interior space of the unit.

Spaces available for use by residents or the general public that are associated with Accessible units, Type A units or Type B units are required to be accessible. This would include spaces within the unit and outside the unit in the same building, as well as facilities that may be outside the building somewhere else on the site. The intent is that a person with a disability could take full advantage of the amenities associated with his or her dwelling or sleeping unit. While it is fairly clear which elements within a unit must be accessible, the associated facilities outside the unit vary depending on the type of building and facilities provided. Public use spaces within a building would include lobby areas while spaces for residents could include shared storage areas or refuse rooms. Shared spaces in nursing homes or assisted living facilities might be dining rooms, therapy rooms and recreational rooms. In dormitories, residents may share study rooms, laundry rooms or mail rooms and facilities located remotely, such as cafeterias. Examples of shared spaces in congregate residences could include community kitchens, living rooms and shared bathrooms. Examples in apartment complexes could include grouped mailboxes, rental offices, exercise rooms and exterior spaces, such as community buildings and swimming pools.

Shared spaces for use of the residents only should be accessible to the same level as the units. Shared spaces also used by the public, such as a lobby, are required to be fully accessible.

Exception 1 is a correlation with Section 1108.4, so that it is clear that the requirements for connecting spaces within a building are not intended to override the exception for an accessible route between stories and mezzanines.

Exception 2 allows for limited access to exterior recreational facilities where multiples of the same type of facility are provided. An example would be multiple tennis courts on the same site for use by residents in a complex (see Section 1111 for additional information). The net result is that a person with a disability, either a resident or guest, can access all Accessible, Type A and Type B units, as well as any associated facilities and public areas on the site.

===== Page 1300 =====
Exception 3 is intended for application to Type B units with a private deck, patio or balcony within an individual unit, or a shared deck, patio or balcony in a "residents only" area of a congregate residence. Decks, patios or balconies located in areas such as the community building or swimming pool should be constructed accessible. When the outside walking surface is impervious to water, such as concrete, there may be 100 mm step-down between the inside finished floor surface and the outside floor surface. The step-down is permitted to address the concern of water infiltration under the doors at such locations. With a maximum 100 mm difference in elevation, adaptation for accessibility is achievable with raised sleepers and decking. Normal door threshold criteria apply.

1108.4 Accessible route. At least one accessible route shall connect accessible building or facility entrances with the primary entrance of each Accessible unit, Type A unit and Type B unit within the building or facility and with those exterior and interior spaces and facilities that serve the units.

Exceptions:

1. If due to circumstances outside the control of the owner, either the slope of the finished ground level between accessible facilities and buildings exceeds one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (1:12), or where physical barriers or legal restrictions prevent the installation of an accessible route, a vehicular route with parking that complies with Section 1106 at each public or common use facility or building is permitted in place of the accessible route.

2. In Group I-3 facilities, an accessible route is not required to connect stories or mezzanines where Accessible units, all common use areas serving Accessible units and all public use areas are on an accessible route.

3. In Group R-2 facilities with Type A units complying with Section 1108.6.2.2.1, an accessible route is not required to connect stories or mezzanines where Type A units, all common use areas serving Type A units and all public use areas are on an accessible route.

4. In other than Group R-2 dormitory housing provided by places of education, in Group R-2 facilities with Accessible units complying with Section 1108.6.2.3.1, an accessible route is not required to connect stories or mezzanines where Accessible units, all common use areas serving Accessible units and all public use areas are on an accessible route.

5. In Group R-1, an accessible route is not required to connect stories or mezzanines within individual units, provided the accessible level meets the provisions for Accessible units and sleeping accommodations for two persons minimum and a toilet facility are provided on that level.

6. In congregate residences in Groups R-3 and R-4, an accessible route is not required to connect stories or mezzanines where Accessible units or Type B units, all common use areas serving Accessible units and Type B units and all public use areas serving Accessible units and Type B units are on an accessible route.

7. An accessible route between stories is not required where Type B units are exempted by Section 1108.7.

Section 1108.3 indicates which spaces associated with accessible dwelling and sleeping units (i.e., Accessible, Type A and Type B units) are required to be accessible. Section 1105 indicates which building entrances are required to be accessible. This section is intended to address two concerns: that there will be at least one accessible route that connects required accessible building entrances with the entrance of all accessible dwelling and sleeping units; and that there also must be accessible routes connecting accessible unit entrances with all interior and exterior common and public use spaces and facilities that serve the accessible dwelling or sleeping unit. Some additional facilities that serve units that are not really considered spaces would be accessible parking (see Section 1106.2), passenger loading zones (see Section 1106.9) and public transportation stops located either on site or adjacent to the perimeter. In determining the site arrival points that serve an accessible unit, the designer should make a reasonable determination of how pedestrians and vehicles would arrive at the site.

The five examples serve to illustrate a variety of conditions that may be encountered on non-level building sites where Exception 1 is applicable. These examples pertain to the accessible route between facilities on a site. In addition to the on-site accessible routes, the accessible route(s) between the site arrival point(s) and facilities on the site must be considered. Note that the exception in Section 1104.1 does not apply to facilities containing or serving Type B units.

===== Page 1301 =====
The intent of this section is to ensure that there will be at least one accessible route that connects all accessible building and facility entrances with the entrance of all Accessible, Type A and Type B units. To qualify as an accessible route, that route must serve pedestrians (e.g., sidewalk or other walkway). People with disabilities who need the features of an Accessible, Type A or Type B dwelling or sleeping unit cannot use them if accessible routes are not provided from the entrances to buildings or facilities to the primary entrance of their dwelling or sleeping unit. There also must be accessible routes connecting accessible building or facility entrances with all interior and exterior spaces and facilities that serve such dwelling or sleeping units. For example, if a development has a recreational facility, such as a community center, persons with disabilities who need the features of an Accessible, Type A or Type B unit need an accessible route from their dwelling unit to that community center.

Exception 1 is intended to provide consistency with the federal FHA, which recognizes that, in very rare circumstances, an accessible pedestrian route between an accessible entrance to an accessible unit or an accessible entrance to a building containing accessible units and an exterior public use or common use facility may be impractical because of factors outside the control of the owner. Section 1108.4 requires an accessible pedestrian route between covered dwelling units and public use or common use areas and facilities that are required to be accessible, except in rare circumstances that are outside the control of the owner where extreme terrain or impractical site characteristics result in a finished grade exceeding 8.33 percent or physical barriers or legal restrictions prevent the installation of an accessible pedestrian route. In these cases, Exception 1 allows access to be provided by means of a vehicular route leading from the accessible parking serving the accessible unit to the accessible parking serving the public use or common use facility. Accessible parking complying with Section 1106 must be provided in each parking area. If a building containing accessible units also contains accessible features that are required by other code provisions or government laws, then Exception 1 may not apply at all. It is important to understand that compliance with the accessible design and construction requirements of the FHA is a legal obligation applicable to all architects, engineers, builders, developers and others involved in the design and construction of housing. HUD's regulations implementing the FHA make it clear that the burden of showing the applicability of exceptions is the responsibility of those individuals and entities involved in the design and construction of such housing. In order to ensure compliance with FHA, architects, engineers, developers, builders and others who use the code must make accessibility a priority at the planning and design phase of Group I and R developments, including the siting of housing and public use or common use areas. To do this, at the initial stage of site planning and design for all sites, before considering whether Exception 1 applies, persons and entities involved in the design of covered residential occupancies must determine whether and how the exceptions of Sections 1108.7.4 and 1108.7.5 apply. After careful site planning and design has been completed, the following factors may then be considered to determine whether it is outside the control of the owner to provide an accessible pedestrian route between a building/Type B dwelling unit entrance and a given public use or common use facility. Each such route must be analyzed individually. Exception 1 will only apply when at least one of the following factors is present:

Legal restrictions outside the control of the owner. These include setback requirements, tree-save ordinances, easements, environmental restrictions and other limitations that prevent installation of an accessible pedestrian route without violating the law.

2 Physical barriers outside the control of the owner. These include physical characteristics of the site, which are outside the control of the owner that prevent the installation of an accessible pedestrian route.

3 On sites that qualify for the exceptions of Sections 1108.7.4 and 1108.7.5, the presence of extreme terrain or other unusual site characteristics (e.g., flood plain, wetlands) outside the control of the owner that would require substantial additional grading to achieve a slope that will allow for an accessible pedestrian route.

In considering whether the additional grading is substantial enough to qualify for Exception 1, the extent to which the builder has elected to grade the site for other purposes unassociated with accessibility must be considered. If grading for those other purposes is extensive, then substantial additional grading would be necessary to provide the required accessible pedestrian route. If grading for other purposes is not extensive, and substantial additional grading is necessary to provide an accessible pedestrian route, then reliance on Exception 1 would be appropriate. Note that when

===== Page 1302 =====
determining whether the additional grading is substantial, one may not consider the grading that the builder must perform to provide accessible pedestrian routes from site arrival points to the accessible entrances of accessible dwelling or sleeping units. If none of the factors above are present, Exception 1 does not apply. If one or more of these factors is present, then the next step in determining whether Exception 1 applies (i.e., the vehicular route is the only feasible option) is to consider alternative locations and designs for buildings, facilities and accessible pedestrian routes connecting each accessible building and accessible dwelling unit entrance and each public use or common use area required to be accessible to ensure that there is no other way to provide the required accessible pedestrian routes. It is important to recognize that if a road sloping 8.33 percent or less can be provided, then an accessible pedestrian route would also be feasible and must be provided. Following are some examples to illustrate the proper application of Exception 1:

Example 1: An undisturbed site has slopes of 8.33 percent or less between required accessible entrances to Type B dwelling units and public use or common use areas and there are no legal restrictions or other unique characteristics preventing the construction of accessible routes. For aesthetic reasons, the developer would like to create some hills or decorative berms on the site. Because there are no extreme site conditions (severe terrain or unusual site characteristics such as flood plains), and no legal barriers that prevent installation of an accessible pedestrian route between the buildings/Type B dwelling units and any planned public use or common use facilities, the developer will still be obligated to provide accessible pedestrian routes. Exception 1 to Section 1108.4 is inapplicable in this circumstance.

Example 2: A developer plans to construct several buildings with Type B units clustered in a level area of a site that has some slopes of 10 percent. A swimming pool and tennis court will be added on the two opposing sides of the site. The builder plans grading that will result in a finished grade exceeding a slope of 8.33 percent along the route between the Type B units and the swimming pool and tennis court. There are no physical barriers or legal restrictions outside the control of the owner or builder that prevent him or her from reducing the existing grade to provide an accessible pedestrian route between the Type B units and the pool and tennis court. Therefore, the builder's building plan would not be approved under the code because it is within the owner's control to have the final grading fall below 8.33 percent and meet the slope and other requirements for an accessible pedestrian route. Accessible pedestrian routes between the Type B units, pool and tennis court must be provided.

Example 3: A multiple-family housing complex is built on two sections of a large piece of property, which is divided by a wide stream running through protected wetlands. Both sections of the property are at the same relative elevation and have dwelling units with accessible routes from site arrival points; however, a combination clubhouse and swimming pool is located on one section of the property. Access to each section is provided by an existing public road outside the boundary of the site, which includes a bridge over the stream. Environmental restrictions prevent construction of any type of paved surface between the two sections within the boundary of the site. If environmental restrictions do not prevent the construction of an accessible pedestrian route, such as a boardwalk, through the wetlands connecting the two sections, then the accessible pedestrian route must be provided even if a road cannot be provided. If construction of any type of pedestrian route is prohibited, then a vehicular route that utilizes the public road and bridge is permitted with parking complying with Section 1106 located at the clubhouse/swimming pool, even though the vehicular route relies on a public road instead of a road through the development.

Example 4: A narrow and deep site has a level section in the front taking up most of the site and another level section at the back that is located up a steep incline. The developer chooses to place all of the buildings/Type B dwelling units on the front section to provide for accessible routes from site arrival points to building entrances. After considering all options for siting buildings and facilities in different locations, including the priority of accessibility, the most feasible location for a planned swimming pool is at the top of the higher section to the rear of the property. Because of the narrowness of the site and the relative elevation of the upper level at the rear of the property, it is impracticable to construct an accessible pedestrian route to the pool; however, a road that slopes more than 8.33 percent can be provided. Under these circumstances, Exception 1 is applicable and access to the swimming pool on the upper level of the site may be provided by means of a vehicular route with parking complying with Section 1106 provided at the Type B dwelling units and the pool.

===== Page 1303 =====
Example 5: A developer plans to build a multiple family housing complex with non-elevator buildings on a site with hilly terrain. All of these buildings will have some Type B dwelling units. The developer plans to locate a tennis court on the site. There are gentle slopes exceeding 8.33 percent with existing trees between the entrances to the Type B units and the tennis court. There is also a tree-save ordinance in place. If the builder can grade the site to allow for an accessible pedestrian route to the tennis court without disturbing the trees in violation of the tree-save ordinance, then an accessible pedestrian route between the Type B units and the planned location of the tennis court must be provided. If, however, the grading necessary to reduce the slope of the site near the trees to provide an accessible route would cause tree loss or damage in violation of the ordinance, then the developer cannot grade without violating the tree-save ordinance. The developer must then consider whether the tennis court can be relocated so it is served by an accessible pedestrian route, and if so, the tennis court must be relocated. If the tennis court cannot be relocated so it can be served by an accessible pedestrian route, then the developer may provide a vehicular route from the Type B dwelling units to the tennis court with parking complying with Section 1106 at the Type B dwelling units and the tennis court. Note, however, that if the developer can provide an accessible pedestrian route from some of the buildings without violating the ordinance, the developer must do so, even if it is necessary to provide a vehicular route from other buildings. Additionally, if the grading and construction of the proposed vehicular route can be limited to 8.33 percent by design and would not violate the tree-save ordinance, it is likely that an additional accessible walkway adjacent to the vehicular route would also fall under the scope of work that would not violate the tree-save ordinance and, therefore, must be provided, eliminating the use of Exception 1. (This completes the guidance on this topic provided by HUD for inclusion in this commentary.)

Exception 2 is coordination with jail (Group I-3) provisions in Sections 1103.2.13 and 1108.5.5. Due to safety and security concerns, Accessible units are required in jails, and must be dispersed by type, but not by location. This would result in areas of a jail having only cells (i.e., sleeping units) that are exempted from accessibility. An accessible route is not required to those cells, or the common areas associated with those cells. The public and administrative side of the jail cannot use this exception.

Exception 3 deals with large apartment buildings or apartment complexes (i.e., more than dwelling units), where Type A units are required. If the common use and public use spaces associated with the Type A units are on an accessible level, Section 1108.4 would not require an elevator between stories. Section 1108.7.1 would possibly allow for no elevator in the building for the upper floors.

Exception 4 is a similar idea to Exception 3, only dealing with larger Group R-2 congregate residences (i.e., more than 16 residents, per Section 310.3), such as boarding houses where Accessible units are required. If the common use and public use spaces associated with the Accessible units are on an accessible level, Section 1108.4 would not require an elevator between stories. Section 1108.7.1 would possibly allow for no elevator in the building for the upper floors. When applying Exception 4 it is important to recognize that dormitories at colleges or boarding schools are excluded from this exception. Based on the DOJ adoption of the 2010 ADA Standard, these facilities are required to provide elevators by government law. SBC 201 is consistent with that intent, but it does not differentiate between public and private schools. Many colleges now provide “living communities,” or living arrangements for students with shared studies or interests, on different levels within dormitories. This accessible route requirement is intended to allow for full participation in all activities, as well as to visit or study with students on other levels in the dormitory.

Exception 5 is applicable within individual units in a hotel where the unit itself is multistory or has a mezzanine. If a sleeping area and toilet are located on the accessible level of the unit, there may be other amenities or bedrooms on the non-accessible level. This exception was added to coordinate with the 2010 ADA Standard Section 206.2.3, Exception 5.

Exception 6 is consistent with Exceptions 3 and 4; this time dealing with congregate residences with 16 or fewer residents (see Sections 310.4 and 310.5). In a Group R-3, at least one Type B sleeping unit would have to be provided on the accessible level. In a Group R-4, at least one Accessible sleeping unit would have to be provided on the accessible level. If the common use and public use spaces associated with those particular units are on an accessible

===== Page 1304 =====
level, Section 1108.4 would not require an elevator between stories. Section 1108.7.1 would possibly allow for no elevator in the building for the upper floors.

Exception 7 is a correlation with Section 1108.7, so that it is clear that the requirements for connecting spaces within a building are not intended to override the exception for an accessible route between stories and mezzanines.

1108.5 Group I. Accessible units and Type B units shall be provided in Group I occupancies in accordance with Sections 1108.5.1 through 1108.5.5.

This section introduces five subsections that set forth the threshold for accessibility in institutional occupancies. Note that among the various categories of institutional facilities, only Accessible units and Type B units are scoped. There are no requirements for Type A units in institutional occupancies. The criteria for Accessible units and Type B units are specified in Chapter 11 of ICC A117.1.

1108.5.1 Group I-1. Accessible units and Type B units shall be provided in Group I-1 occupancies in accordance with Sections 1108.5.1.1 and 1108.5.1.3.

Group I-1 is comparable in many respects to Group R-2 in that it is a residential setting. However, the difference is that Group I-1 is a supervised environment where custodial care is provided due to the reduced physical or mental abilities of the occupants (see Section 308.2).

1108.5.1.1 Accessible units. In Group I-1, Condition 1, at least 4 percent, but not less than one, of the dwelling units and sleeping units shall be accessible units. Accessible dwelling units and sleeping units shall be dispersed among the various classes of units.

Exceptions:

1. Water closets shall not be required to comply with ICC A117.1 where such water closets comply with Section 1110.2.2, in not more than 50 percent of the Accessible units.

2. Roll-in-type showers shall not be required to comply with ICC A117.1 where roll-in-type showers comply with Section 1110.2.3, in not more than 50 percent of the Accessible units.

The threshold for accessibility in apartments (Group R-2), in accordance with Section 1108.6.2.2.1, is that 2 percent of the units are required to be Type A units. It is anticipated that Group I-1 will experience a greater demand for accessible facilities because of the nature of the occupants and the frequency of occupant turnover. As such, this section requires that 4 percent of the sleeping units and their associated facilities (e.g., bathing and toilet facilities) must meet the criteria for Accessible units in Group I-1, Condition 1. To understand the care level and resident capability thresholds demarcating an I-1, Condition 1 facility, see the commentary to Section 308.2. The higher level of accessible units is based on the anticipated need. These Group I-1 types of facilities are not scoped in the 2010 ADA Standard. People residing in Group I-1 facilities are those needing assistance including custodial care. Many older adults do not have the upper-body strength that is needed to use the standard ICC A177.1. Accessible unit grab bar arrangements. These arrangements are configured for self-transfer without assistance. Recognizing that older adults who live in care facilities may not have to upper-body strength to self-transfer for toileting or bathing, the exceptions allow for up to 50 percent of the units that are required to be Accessible units to meet alternative requirements for assisted toileting and assisted bathing (see Sections 1110.2.2 and 1110.2.3) in their associated bathrooms, instead of the requirements of ICC A117.1.

For example, if a building had 60 units, 4 percent of 60 units is 2.4, which would mean three units must be made Accessible. In this scenario, not more than 50 percent can use the assisted toileting and bathing option for the associated bathrooms, so two units must meet ICC A117.1 requirements and one unit can meet the assisted toileting and bathing requirements. The remaining units in the building are permitted to have associated bathrooms built to assist toileting and bathing requirements in ICC A117.1 for Accessible or Type B units.

Bathrooms in the facilities that are for employee or public use are required to comply with ICC A117.1.

1108.5.1.2 Accessible units in Group I-1, Condition 2. In Group I-1, Condition 2, at least 10 percent, but not less than one, of the dwelling units and sleeping units shall be Accessible units. Accessible dwelling units and sleeping units shall be dispersed among the various classes of units.

Exceptions:

1. Water closets shall not be required to comply with ICC A117.1 where such water closets comply with Section 1110.2.2, in not more than 50 percent of the Accessible units.

2. Roll-in-type showers shall not be required to comply with ICC A117.1 where roll-in-type showers comply with Section 1110.2.3

===== Page 1305 =====
, in not more than 50 percent of the Accessible units.

It is anticipated that a greater number of care recipients in Group I-1, Condition 2 will have mobility challenges; therefore, a minimum of 10 percent of sleeping units and their associated facilities must be fully Accessible units. To understand the care level and resident capability thresholds demarcating an I-1, Condition 2 facility, see the commentary to Section 308.2.

Group I-1 types of facilities are not scoped in the 2010 ADA Standard. People residing in Group I-1 facilities are those needing assistance including custodial care. Many older adults do not have the upper-body strength that is needed to use ICC A117.1 Accessible unit grab bar arrangements. These arrangements are configured for self-transfer without assistance.

Recognizing that older adults who live in care facilities may not have to upper-body strength to self-transfer for toileting or bathing, the exceptions allow for up to 50 percent of the units that are required to be Accessible units to meet alternative requirements for assisted toileting and assisted bathing (see Sections 1110.2.2 and 1110.2.3) in their associated bathrooms, instead of the requirements of ICC A117.1.

For example, if a building had 50 units, 10 percent of 50 units would mean five units must be made Accessible. In this scenario, not more than 50 percent can use the assisted bathing and toileting option for the associated bathrooms, so three units must meet ICC A117.1 requirements and two units can meet the assisted toileting and bathing requirements. The remaining units in the building are permitted to have associated bathrooms built to assisted toileting and bathing requirements in ICC A117.1 for Accessible or Type B units. Bathrooms in the facilities that are for employee or public use are required to comply with ICC A117.1.

1108.5.1.3 Type B units. In structures with four or more dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occupied as a residence, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit intended to be occupied as a residence shall be a Type B unit.

Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1108.7.

As discussed in the general comments to this section, most Group I-1 assisted living facilities are intended to serve as a person's place of residence. Since a Group I-1 starts at an occupant load of more than 16 residents, the Type B criteria for any units that are not Accessible units are almost always required. The exception is a general reference to Section 1108.7, which addresses situations where it is logical to back off on the requirements for Type B units within a structure.

1108.5.2 Group I-2 nursing homes. Accessible units and Type B units shall be provided in nursing homes of Group I-2, Condition 1 occupancies in accordance with Sections 1108.5.2.1 and 1108.5.2.2.

The requirements for accessibility in Group I-2 are based on the anticipated frequency of usage by persons with disabilities. There are different thresholds established for different types of health care occupancies, based on the nature of their activity (see Section 308.3). A nursing home is anticipated to have a high percentage of residents who use wheelchairs or some type of mobility aid as well as those who have hearing and vision impairments.

1108.5.2.1 Accessible units. At least 50 percent but not less than one of each type of the dwelling units and sleeping units shall be Accessible units.

Exceptions:

1. Water closets shall not be required to comply with ICC A117.1 where such water closets comply with Section 1110.2.2, in not more than 90 percent of the Accessible units.

2. Roll-in-type showers shall not be required to comply with ICC A117.1 where roll-in-type showers comply with Section 1110.2.3, in not more than 90 percent of the Accessible units.

Nursing homes, which generally provide long-term care, are more likely to have care recipients with physical disabilities. As such, 50 percent of the patient sleeping rooms and their associated facilities (e.g., bathing and toilet facilities) must meet the criteria for Accessible units. Housing for the elderly should not automatically be classified as a "nursing home." Some residential care/assisted living facilities provide quarters for residents that more closely represent a residential setting (i.e., sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation within the individual living accommodations) and the residents are more ambulatory than in a nursing home. Based on the anticipated frequency of residents needing wheelchairs or other mobility devices, these facilities might be more appropriately classified within the 4- or 10-percent requirement for Accessible units (see Sections 1108.5.1.1, 1108.5.1.2 and 1108.5.3.1).

Particularly in nursing homes, care recipients may use wheelchairs due to health limitations.

===== Page 1306 =====
In addition, many care recipients do not have the upper-body strength that is needed to use the standard ICC A117.1 grab bar arrangements at toilets or showers. In these facilities, based on residents' capabilities and safety concerns, there is an anticipation that many of the care recipients will need to be assisted by staff.

The exceptions allow for up to 90 percent of the units that are required to be Accessible units to meet alternative requirements for assisted toileting and assisted bathing (see Sections 1110.2.2 and 1110.2.3) in their associated bathrooms, instead of the requirements of ICC A117.1.

For example, if a building had 75 units, 50 percent of 75 units is 37.5, which would mean 38 units must be Accessible units. In this scenario, not more than 90 percent can use the assisted bathing and toileting option for the associated bathrooms, so four units must meet ICC A117.1 requirements and 34 units can meet the assisted toileting and bathing requirements. The remaining units in the building are permitted to have associated bathrooms built to assist toileting and bathing requirements in ICC A117.1 for Accessible or Type B units.

Bathrooms in the facilities that are for employee or public use are required to comply with ICC A117.1.

1108.5.2.2 Type B units. In structures with four or more dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occupied as a residence, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit intended to be occupied as a residence shall be a Type B unit.

Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1108.7.

As discussed in the general comments to this section, most Group I-2 nursing homes are intended to serve as a person's place of residence. The Type B criteria for any units that are not Accessible units are almost always required. The exception is a general reference to Section 1108.7, which addresses situations where it is logical to back off on the requirements for Type B units within a structure.

1108.5.3 Group I-2 hospitals. Accessible units and Type B units shall be provided in general-purpose hospitals, psychiatric facilities and detoxification facilities of Group I-2 occupancies in accordance with Sections 1108.5.3.1 and 1108.5.3.2.

The requirements for accessibility in Group I-2 are based on the anticipated number of occupants with disabilities. There are different thresholds established for different types of health care occupancies based on the nature of their services and level of care provided. The anticipated need in hospitals is partially based on care recipients needing varying levels of assistance due to temporary disabilities resulting from illness or surgery.

1108.5.3.1 Accessible units. At least 10 percent, but not less than one, of the dwelling units and sleeping units shall be Accessible units.

Exception: Entry doors to Accessible dwelling units or sleeping units shall not be required to provide the maneuvering clearance beyond the latch side of the door.

While the anticipated percentage of care recipients in general-purpose hospitals is typically higher than 10 percent, there is also an anticipation that many of the care recipients will be routinely assisted by staff. While the 10 percent is not required to be distributed by location or type, Section 1110.2, Exception 5 exempts the bathrooms associated with critical care or intensive care and Section 1110.2, Exception 6 exempts the bathrooms associated with bariatric facilities. The bathrooms associated with the other 90 percent of the rooms can be designed to best serve the patient's needs, which could use ICC A117.1 requirements, the assisted toileting and bathing options (see Sections 1110.2.2 and 1110.2.3) or other means. Bathrooms for public use or employee use must comply with ICC A117.1 (see Section 1110.2).

The exception recognizes the practical implications of door maneuvering clearances on the room side at in-swinging doors in smaller-sized patient sleeping rooms in hospitals. The maneuvering clearance is still required on the outside of the Accessible patient sleeping room door. Since the maneuvering clearance in ICC A117.1 is based on the size of the door, there is no credit provided for the wider 1050 mm clear width door (required in Section 1010.1.1 in Group I-2 for movement of beds) versus the standard 800 mm clear width door. Without this exception, a patient room would likely require extra width for maneuvering clearance at the door when a toilet room is located on the same wall as the door. Due to operational procedures and observation needs, the door position is normally open. Therefore, the need for door maneuvering clearance on the interior side is reduced. At hospitals, the patient room door is usually closed only when privacy is needed during procedures. In addition, the wider door would provide additional space in front of the door to access the hardware if the door was closed.

===== Page 1307 =====
Maneuvering clearances are part of an accessible route, and accessible routes connect accessible elements; therefore, maneuvering clearances at patient sleeping rooms that are not Accessible or Type B units are not required since an accessible route is not required. See Section 1108.5.3.2 regarding Type B units in hospitals.

1108.5.3.2 Type B units. In structures with four or more dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occupied as a residence, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit intended to be occupied as a residence shall be a Type B unit.

Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1108.7.

As discussed in the general comments to this section, most Group I-2 hospitals are not intended to serve as a person's place of residence; therefore, Type B units are not required in most hospitals. However, whether a Group I-2 psychiatric or detoxification facility is a person's place of abode is subject to interpretation. Please see the general discussion to this section for additional information. The exception is a general reference to Section 1108.7, which addresses situations where it is logical to back off on the requirements for Type B units within a structure.

1108.5.4 Group I-2 rehabilitation facilities. In hospitals and rehabilitation facilities of Group I-2 occupies that specialize in treating conditions that affect mobility, or units within either that specialize in treating conditions that affect mobility, 100 percent of the dwelling units and sleeping units shall be Accessible units.

Exceptions:

1. Water closets shall not be required to comply with ICC A117.1 where such water closets comply with Section 1110.2.2, in not more than 50 percent of Accessible units.

2. Roll-in-type showers shall not be required to comply with ICC A117.1 where roll-in-type showers comply with Section 1110.2.3, in not more than 50 percent of Accessible units.

The requirements for accessibility in Group I-2 are based on the anticipated frequency of usage by persons with disabilities. There are different thresholds established for different types of health care occupancies based on the nature of their activity. In rehabilitation facilities that specialize in treating conditions that affect mobility, the anticipated need is very high compared to other Group I-2 facilities. In such cases, it is realistic to presume that the majority, if not all, of the care recipients will have some degree of mobility impairment and will, thus, require accessible features. Accordingly, all patient rooms and their associated bathing and toilet facilities are required to be Accessible units. However, there is also an anticipation that many of the care recipients will routinely be assisted by staff.

The exceptions allow for up to 50 percent of the units that are required to be Accessible units to meet alternate requirements for assisted toileting and assisted bathing (see Sections 1110.2.2 and 1110.2.3) in their associated bathrooms, instead of the requirements of ICC A117.1.

For example, if a building had 75 units, not more than 50 percent can use the assisted bathing and toileting option for the associated bathrooms, so 38 units must meet ICC A117.1 requirements and 37 units can meet the assisted toileting and bathing requirements.

Bathrooms in the facilities that are for employee or public use are required to comply with ICC A117.1 (see Section 1110.2).

1108.5.5 Group I-3. Accessible units shall be provided in Group I-3 occupancies in accordance with Sections 1108.5.5.1 through 1108.5.5.3.

The requirement for accessibility in Group I-3 facilities was taken from the 2010 ADA Standard (see Section 308.4 for Group I-3). Section 1108.5.5.1 contains requirements for general housing cells. Sections 1108.5.5.2 and 1108.5.5.3 are additional requirements for special types of cells or holding areas. While jail cells may be considered a detainee's residence, since the FHA does not cover detention and correctional facilities, Type B units are not required in Group I-3 occupancies. For visiting areas in jails, see Section 1110.12.2.

1108.5.5.1 Group I-3 sleeping units. In Group I-3 occupancies, at least 3 percent of the total number of sleeping units in the facility, but not less than one unit in each classification level, shall be Accessible units.

The requirement for sleeping units or cells in Group I-3 is for 3 percent of the general housing cells and their associated facilities to be Accessible units. The current trend in jail design is to group housing cells into "pods." Since the administration of the correctional facility will determine where detainees will reside, there are no requirements for distribution of the Accessible units within the same basic security level or type (e.g., female, male, juvenile). Most jails are all one security level and only house male or female inmates. A correctional facility may decide to locate all its Accessible cells in one pod due to suicide.

===== Page 1308 =====
prevention and other safety concerns. Sections 1103.2.13 and 1108.4 have exceptions for spaces shared by detainees for areas within the jail where Accessible units are not provided.

1108.5.5.2 Special holding cells and special housing cells or rooms. In addition to the Accessible units required by Section 1108.5.5.1, where special holding cells or special housing cells or rooms are provided, at least one serving each purpose shall be an Accessible unit. Cells or rooms subject to this requirement include, but are not limited to, those used for purposes of orientation, protective custody, administrative or disciplinary detention or segregation, detoxification and medical isolation.

Exception: Cells or rooms specially designed without protrusions and that are used solely for purposes of suicide prevention shall not be required to include grab bars.

If special types of holding or housing cells are provided within a facility (e.g., orientation, protective custody, disciplinary detention, segregation, detoxification, medical isolation), at least one of each type must be an Accessible unit. A cell that is designed specifically for a suicide watch is required to meet Accessible unit criteria, but if a toilet is provided, grab bars are not required.

1108.5.5.3 Medical care facilities. Patient sleeping units or cells required to be Accessible units in medical care facilities shall be provided in addition to any medical isolation cells required to comply with Section 1108.5.5.2.

Where medical care facilities are provided within a detention or correctional facility, 10 percent of the units are required to be Accessible units. The intent is to be consistent with the hospital requirements found in Section 1108.5.3.1.

1108.6 Group R. Accessible units, Type A units and Type B units shall be provided in Group R occupancies in accordance with Sections 1108.6.1 through 1108.6.4.

This section introduces four subsections that address accessibility requirements for occupancies in Group R. Criteria for Accessible units, Type A units and Type B units are specified in Chapter 11 of ICC A117.1. While Type C criteria is also provided in ICC A117.1, this type of dwelling unit is not currently scoped in SBCs.

SBC 1101/1102 references this chapter for accessibility provisions. Therefore, this chapter may be applicable to housing covered under the SBC 1101/1102 (see commentary, Section 1108.6.3). Structures sent to Chapter 11 from SBC 1101/1102 Section 320 would be considered Group R-3 for purposes of accessibility only.

1108.6.1 Group R-1. Accessible units and Type B units shall be provided in Group R-1 occupancies in accordance with Sections 1108.6.1.1 and 1108.6.1.2.

The terms “dwelling unit” and “sleeping unit” are utilized instead of “guestrooms” so that the amenities in the units themselves are reflected. An exception applicable to small bed-and-breakfast style hotels is provided in Section 1103.2.11. Hotels, motels, boarding houses and other short term housing types are required to provide Accessible units. Where such facilities are also intended to be occupied as a residence, Type B unit criteria are applicable. For additional discussion, please see the general comments at the beginning of this chapter.

The following factors should be considered where persons can stay more or less than 30 days, including hotels, motels, corporate housing and seasonal vacation units, in determining the applicability of Type B unit criteria:

1 Amenities included inside the units, including kitchen facilities.

2 Whether the property is to be marketed to the public as short-term housing.

3 Whether the terms and length of the occupancy will be established through a lease or other written agreement.

4 How payment is calculated (e.g., on a daily, weekly, monthly or yearly basis).

If the amenities and operation of the units are closer to those of apartments than of hotels, they are subject to Type B requirements. For example, if a hotel is marketed as short-term housing, payment is made monthly, and if the units contain kitchens, the hotel would be subject to Type B unit criteria. For additional information see the commentary at the beginning of this chapter and Section 1108.

1108.6.1.1 Accessible units. Accessible dwelling units and sleeping units shall be provided in accordance with Table 1108.6.1.1. On a multiple-building site, where structures contain more than 50 dwelling units or sleeping units, the number of Accessible units shall be determined per structure. On a multiple-building site, where structures contain 50 or fewer dwelling units or sleeping units, all dwelling units and sleeping units on a site shall be considered to determine the total number of Accessible units. Accessible units shall be dispersed among the various classes of units.

The required number of Accessible dwelling or sleeping units in Group R-1 is indicated in Table 1108.6.1.1. The table requires

===== Page 1309 =====
Accessible units to include a variety of bathing options. Where roll-in-type showers are provided, ICC A117.1 requires seats in roll-in showers. These showers can then serve the dual purpose of roll-in and transfer showers.

For sites where hotel rooms are provided in multiple buildings, all units on the site should be considered to determine the number of Accessible units if each building has 50 or fewer units. For example, if a hotel consists of several small buildings on a site, the same number of Accessible units would be required as if the hotel was constructed as a single structure. If the hotel has buildings with more than 50 units, those buildings must be considered separately to determine the number of Accessible units (see Commentary Figure 1108.6.1.1).

Accessible units must be dispersed among the different types of units. This is not an automatic requirement to disperse the Accessible units to different floor levels (see Section 1108.4). When different classes of dwelling or sleeping units are available, special amenities must also be made available in the Accessible units, including suites or larger rooms, kitchenettes, executive levels, etc. For example, if sleeping unit options include single rooms, suites or kitchenettes, and two Accessible units are required, the Accessible units must be provided in two of the three options. If no other types of amenities are provided on other levels, the hotel could provide the Accessible units on the main level. Some hotels provide all Accessible units on the main level to foster ease of escape from the building during an emergency for guests with disabilities. Keep in mind that services available to guests (e.g., pools, exercise rooms, laundry rooms) must also be on an accessible route for guests in the Accessible units.

Note that, in accordance with Section 1010.1.1, all doors within a hotel room are required to have a clear width of 800 mm, even in the nonaccessible rooms. With a 800 mm clear width on all doors, a person using a mobility device should at least be able to get into the bathroom in the nonaccessible units.

The number of Accessible dwelling and sleeping units required is coordinated with the 2010 ADA Standard requirements. The ADAAG Review Federal Advisory Committee reviewed all information and data provided by the industry in support of a lower number of Accessible units being required. The committee determined that accessible features are useful to persons with disabilities beyond those who use wheelchairs, and that good design would lessen the "institutional" impression that may make Accessible units less attractive to non-disabled guests. To accommodate wheelchair users in relatively large facilities, this table requires a minimum number of units to be equipped with roll-in-type showers. The second column in this table is intended to show that different options (e.g., roll-in shower, transfer shower or bathtubs) are available in the Accessible units. This column is not intended to prohibit roll-in showers with seats when there are only one or two Accessible units in the hotel. Since the idea for dispersion by types is equal access to options, if a hotel decides to provide showers in all units, this table is not intended to require bathtubs in the Accessible units.

1108.6.1.2 Type B units. In structures with four or more dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occupied as a residence, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit intended to be occupied as a residence shall be a Type B unit.

Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1108.7.

Most hotels and motels are not intended to be occupied as a residence; therefore, the criteria for Type B units would not be applicable. However, in certain situations, extended-stay hotels or similar corporate housing arrangements are required to meet Type B unit criteria. For additional information on how to determine if this section is applicable, see the comments at the beginning of this chapter and Sections 1108 and 1108.6.1. The Accessible sleeping units required by Section 1108.6.1.1 exceed Type B unit requirements. The exception is a general reference to Section 1108.7, which addresses situations where it is logical to back off on the requirements for Type B units within a structure.

1108.6.2 Group R-2. Accessible units, Type A units and Type B units shall be provided in Group R-2 occupancies in accordance with Sections 1108.6.2.1 through 1108.6.2.3.

The terms “dwelling unit” and “sleeping unit” are utilized instead of “apartment,” “dorm room,” “sleeping accommodations,” “suites,” etc., so that the amenities in the units themselves are reflected and for consistent application within all Group R-2 facilities. Since these types of facilities are intended to be occupied as a residence, Type B unit criteria would be applicable. For a complete discussion, see the General Comments to this chapter and the commentaries to Section 1108 and its subsections.

Timeshare properties require a different analysis. Timeshare owners have an interest in the property, yet they typically stay less than 30 days. For a timeshare property to be subject to Type B requirements, the owners must have an ownership interest in the property itself, rather

===== Page 1310 =====
than in just coming to the area for a vacation without ties to a particular property. The following additional factors must be considered to determine whether timeshare units must meet Type B design and construction requirements:

1 Whether traditional rights of ownership are to be unrestricted (e.g., whether the time-share owner has the right to occupy, alter or exercise control over a particular unit over a period of time).

2 The nature of the ownership interest conveyed (e.g., fee simple).

3 The extent to which operations resemble those of a hotel, motel or inn (e.g., reservation, central registration, meals, laundry service).

If an owner’s rights regarding the units are subject to few restrictions and the operation of the units is closer to that of condominiums/apartments than hotels, the units are subject to Type B requirements.

1108.6.2.1 Live/work units. In live/work units constructed in accordance with Section 419, the nonresidential portion is required to be accessible. In a structure where there are four or more live/work units intended to be occupied as a residence, the residential portion of the live/work unit shall be a Type B unit.

Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1108.7.

Live/work units are dwelling units in which a significant portion of the space includes a nonresidential use operated by the tenant/owner. Although the entire unit is classified as a Group R-2 occupancy for construction purposes, for accessibility purposes it is viewed more as a mixed-use condition. The residential portion of the unit is regulated differently for accessibility purposes than the nonresidential portion.

When live/work units are built in a strip, similar to townhouses, the exceptions for Type B units set forth in Section 1108.7 would also exempt such units where applicable. For example, a two-story dwelling unit above the work unit in a nonelevator building would not be subject to Type B requirements because of the exemption in Section 1108.7.2. The code does not clarify if a two-story live/work unit with the business on the entire first floor and the residence on the entire second floor would be considered a multistory dwelling unit for purposes of the exception in Section 1108.7.2. Where a portion of the dwelling unit was on the first floor and all of the second floor, the unit would be exempted as a multistory unit without elevator service. If the dwelling unit was the entire second and third floors, the same exception would be applicable. If the live/work unit is a single story with business in front and the dwelling behind, Type B criteria would be applicable. Just as a reminder, Type B units are applied per structure, not per building, so legal property lines may not be relevant when evaluating accessibility requirements (see Section 1108).

In the nonresidential portion of the unit, full accessibility would be required based on the intended use. For example, if the nonresidential area of the unit is utilized for hair care services, all elements related to the service activity must be accessible. This would include site parking where provided, site and building accessible routes, the public entrance, and applicable patron services. In essence, the work portion of the live/work unit would be regulated in the same manner as a stand-alone commercial occupancy.

1108.6.2.2 Apartment houses Type A units and Type B units shall be provided in apartment houses in accordance with Sections 1108.6.2.2.1 and 1108.6.2.2.2.

Unless they receive some type of government funding, apartments and condominiums are not covered by the 2010 ADA Standard. Note that the code deals with apartments and condominiums in the same manner when dealing with accessibility requirements. The scope for Type B units is consistent with FHAG requirements.

1108.6.2.2.1 Type A units. In Group R-2 occupancies containing more than 20 dwelling units or sleeping units, at least 2 percent but not less than one of the units shall be a Type A unit. All Group R-2 units on a site shall be considered to determine the total number of units and the required number of Type A units. Type A units shall be dispersed among the various classes of units.

Exceptions:

1. The number of Type A units is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1108.7.

2. Existing structures on a site shall not contribute to the total number of units on a site.

To be able to better accommodate a person who uses a wheelchair, 2 percent of apartments and condominiums are required to provide Type A units within the development. The housing industry has been concerned that dwelling units equipped with the full range of features to accomplish accessibility will not be marketable to people without disabilities. The Type A requirements are intended to establish a middle ground that will satisfy both needs.

===== Page 1311 =====
Allowances made during the construction process for future conversion for accessibility, such as reinforcement in bathroom walls for future installation of grab bars, will allow a unit to be altered later at a considerably lesser cost. Type A units are required when the site contains more than 20 dwelling units or sleeping units. So that there is a consistent number of Type A units in multiple-building sites based on the size of a development as a whole, all the buildings are added together to determine the number required. For example, a 300-unit building would require six Type A units, and a development with 75 buildings with four units per building would also require six Type A units. Exception 2 is in recognition that a development may be built in stages and does not exempt existing buildings that are being altered from complying with the requirement for Type A units. Only the units that are being constructed as part of that development phase are considered in determining the number of Type A units. For specific provisions see SBC 901 Sections 306.7.10.2.

The Type A units must be dispersed among the classes of units provided. For example, if one-two- and three-bedroom units are available with the development and two Type A units are required, it is the designer's choice as to which two of the options to provide as Type A units. The designer, however, cannot choose to only provide the one-bedroom option with both Type A units. This is not intended to require Type A units to be provided in different buildings in a multiple-building site. Many times in multiple-building developments, there are shared facilities such as clubhouses or pools. The designer may choose to locate the Type A units in the building closest to those amenities for ease of access for the residents. This is acceptable as long as the dispersion-by-type requirement is met.

In limited circumstances, townhouse-style units can be Group R-2 facilities (see Sections 310.3 and 310.4). If multistory units are provided for the Type A units, ICC A117.1 would require an accessible route between levels. Within the dwelling, this can be provided by a passenger elevator, a LULA, a private residence elevator (see Section 1110.8) or a platform lift (see Section 1110.9, Item 4). A possible alternative would be to provide some single-story units within the development to meet Type A unit requirements. If the amenities and size are the same, they could be considered the same type as a multilevel unit. The multistory exception in Section 1108.7.2 is not applicable to Type A units.

Exception 1 allows the number of Type A units to be reduced in accordance with Section 1108.7.5 when the building's first-floor elevation is required to be raised due to floodplain regulations. This is the only exception that allows for a reduction in the number of Type A units required.

1108.6.2.2.2 Type B units. Where there are four or more dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occupied as a residence in a single structure, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit intended to be occupied as a residence shall be a Type B unit.

Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1108.7.

Where four or more dwelling or sleeping units are provided in a single structure, those units must meet Type B criteria (note the use of the term "structure" instead of "building"). The criteria are applicable if four dwelling units are built together, regardless of fire walls [see Commentary Figure 1108.6.2.2.2(1) and Figure 1108.6.2.2.2(2)]. The exception is a general reference to Section 1108.7, which addresses situations where it is logical to back off on the requirements for Type B units within a structure. Type A units provided in accordance with Section 1108.6.2.2.1 exceed Type B unit requirements.

1108.6.2.3 Group R-2 other than live/work units, apartment houses In Group R-2 occupancies, other than live/work units, apartment houses falling within the scope of Sections 1108.6.2.1 and 1108.6.2.2, Accessible units and Type B units shall be provided in accordance with Sections 1108.6.2.3.1 and 1108.6.2.3.2. Bedrooms within congregate living facilities and boarding houses shall be counted as sleeping units for the purpose of determining the number of units. Where the bedrooms are grouped into dwelling or sleeping units, only one bedroom in each dwelling or sleeping unit shall be permitted to count towards the number of required Accessible units.

This group would include congregate housing types, such as dormitories, boarding houses. Nontransient hotels and motels would typically be grouped with these requirements since they may also be operating as transient and nontransient. A building used for two purposes must be designed for the most restrictive provisions (see Section 302.1). A time-share should comply with Section 1108.6.2.1 or 1108.6.2.2, based on whichever it most closely represents (see also commentary, Section 1108.6.2).

Dormitories are typically located in universities. Universities are required to make all programs accessible. Therefore, dormitories are covered by ADA requirements. Boarding houses have

===== Page 1312 =====
similar types of living arrangements. It seems logical that the same anticipated need should result in the same level of required Accessible units. Since all these facilities typically serve as a person's residence, they are covered by the FHAG. The scope for Accessible units is consistent with ADA requirements for dormitories. The scope for Type B units is consistent with FHAG requirements.

There has been some discussion that congregate living facilities should be considered dwelling units instead of a group of sleeping units with common use living areas. As a single-family dwelling unit, they would not have to provide any level of accessibility (see Section 1103.2.3). This is not the correct interpretation for providing accessibility features within congregate residences. The new style of dormitory living is groups of bedrooms that share a common living space, sometimes with a kitchen or kitchenette. If these are counted as dwelling units instead of sleeping units, the number of Accessible rooms available may be less, or multiple bedrooms in the same suite would be interpreted to all be Accessible units. Administratively, when housing students, the universities still treat this style of units as the old-style dorm rooms down a long hallway. The last sentence is intended to make clear that for the purpose of determining the number of Accessible units, the bedrooms in a Group R-2 congregate residence must be counted separately. To meet dispersion requirements, in a configuration with multiple bedrooms in a sleeping unit (see Commentary Figure 1108.6.2.3), only one of the bedrooms can be counted as part of the required number of Accessible units. See the commentary to Sections 1108.3 and 1108.4 regarding what shared elements must be accessible.

## 1108.6.2.3.1 Accessible units. Accessible dwelling units and sleeping units shall be provided in accordance with Table 1108.6.1.1.

The number of Accessible units required in these Group R-2 facilities is the same as that required in hotels and motels. All associated and shared areas (e.g., bathrooms, kitchens, study rooms) must also be accessible in accordance with Section 1002 of ICC A117.1. A certain number of the Accessible units must have associated bathrooms equipped with a roll-in shower. See the commentary for Section 1108.6.2.3 regarding how to count the number of units to determine the number of Accessible units required.

1108.6.2.3.2 Type B units. Where there are four or more dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occupied as a residence in a single structure, every dwelling unit and every sleeping unit intended to be occupied as a residence shall be a Type B unit.

Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1108.7.
The FHA specifically considers dormitories as places where students live, even if it is just for the school year. Therefore, when four or more sleeping units are provided in a single structure, those units must meet Type B criteria. The Accessible sleeping units required by Section 1108.6.2.2.1 exceed Type B unit requirements. The exception is a general reference to Section 1108.7, which addresses situations where it is logical to back off on the requirements for Type B units within a structure. See the commentary to Section 1108.4 regarding elevator requirements in dormitories.

1108.6.3 Group R-3. In Group R-3, occupancies where there are four or more dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occupied as a residence in a single structure, every dwelling unit and sleeping unit intended to be occupied as a residence shall be a Type B unit. Bedrooms within congregate living facilities and boarding houses shall be counted as sleeping units for the purpose of determining the number of units.

Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1108.7.

Where four or more dwelling or sleeping units are provided in a single structure, those units must meet Type B criteria (note the use of the term "structure" instead of "building"). Since Group R-3 structures can be a series of one or two dwellings per building separated by fire walls (see Section 310.5), the provisions for Type B units would apply to groups of R-3 units. The criteria are applicable if four dwelling units are built together, regardless of fire walls. The exception is a general reference to Section 1108.7, which addresses situations where it is logical to back off on the requirements for Type B units within a structure.

Transient congregate residences with 10 or fewer occupants and nontransient congregate residences with 16 or fewer occupants are permitted to comply with Group R-3 construction requirements (see Section 310.4). Small bed-and-breakfast-type hotels are exempted from accessibility under Section 1103.2.11 (and SBC 1101/1102 Section 320). There has been some discussion that congregate living facilities, such as group homes and boarding houses, should be considered dwelling units instead of a group of

===== Page 1313 =====
sleeping units with common use living areas. As a single-family dwelling unit, they would not have to provide any level of accessibility (see Section 1103.2.3). This is not the correct interpretation for providing accessibility features in Group R-3 congregate residences. The last sentence is intended to make clear that for the purpose of determining the number of Type B units, the bedrooms in the congregate residence must be counted separately. See the commentaries to Sections 1108.3 and 1108.4 regarding what shared elements must be accessible.

Section 101.2, Exception 1 states that detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses that are both three stories or less and have an independent means of egress must comply with SBC 1101/1102. Section 1103.2.3 exempts detached single-family homes and duplexes from accessibility requirements, but not townhouses. In SBC 1101/1102, townhouses are further defined as extending from foundation to roof and open on at least two sides. Therefore, the typical side-by-side townhouse is constructed using SBC 1101/1102. Any configuration of townhouses that does not meet all four criteria has to be constructed under SBC 201 as Group R-2 or possibly Group R-3. If the structure is divided into one or two dwelling units per building with fire walls, the structure is a Group R-3 (see commentaries, Sections 310.4 and 310.5). Group I-1 and I-2 institutional-type facilities with five or fewer residents have the option of complying with SBC 201 or SBC 1101/1102, since they often operate similarly to a single family home (see Sections 308.2.4, 308.3.2 and 310.4.1). Day care facilities within single-family homes are specifically addressed under Section 1103.2.12. Live/work units are specifically addressed under Section 1108.6.2.1.

Section 320.1 of SBC 1101/1102 refers any structure with four or more sleeping units or dwelling units back to SBC 201 as Group R-3 buildings for accessibility requirements. Since these types of facilities typically serve as a person's permanent residence, the units must meet Type B criteria. The exception is a general reference to Section 1108.7, which addresses situations where it is logical to back off on the requirements for Type B units within a structure.
1108.6.4 Group R-4. Accessible units and Type B units shall be provided in Group R-4 occupancies in accordance with Sections 1108.6.4.1 and 1108.6.4.2. Bedrooms in Group R-4 facilities shall be counted as sleeping units for the purpose of determining the number of units.

Group R-4 facilities are limited to between six and 16 residents. A Group R-4 is basically a small Group I-1 facility (see Sections 308.2.3 and 310.5). The Group R-4 occupancy was originally developed in response to some lawsuits filed under the FHA concerning homes for adults with mental disabilities. Under the past legacy codes, a structure where persons live in a supervised environment is a Group I occupancy. In neighborhoods zoned residential only, a variance is required if a group of adults who need to live in a supervised environment wants to move into a single family-style dwelling. Additionally, Group I facilities are typically required to be sprinkled throughout with an NFPA 13 system. This type of sprinkler system is not what is typically used in a single-family home. The 16-resident criterion is based on facilities where residents are capable of self-preservation, the number 16 also happens to be the limit of residents permitted in a building where an NFPA 13D sprinkler system can be utilized. Establishing these types of facilities as part of Group R eliminates potential conflict with the zoning issue. The limit on the number of residents and allowing the alternative sprinkler system addresses the discrimination in housing concerns and provides a reasonable level of sprinkler protection for the residents.

There has been some discussion that congregate living facilities, such as group homes, should be considered dwelling units instead of a group of sleeping units with common-use living areas. As a single-family dwelling unit, they would not have to provide any level of accessibility (see Section 1103.2.3). This is not the correct interpretation for providing accessibility features in congregate residences. The last sentence is intended to make clear that for the purpose of determining the number of Accessible units, the bedrooms in the congregate residence must be counted separately. See the commentaries to Sections 1108.3 and 1108.4 regarding what shared elements must be accessible.

1108.6.4.1 Accessible units. In Group R-4 Condition 1, at least one of the sleeping units shall be an Accessible unit.

The requirement for one sleeping unit and its associated facilities (e.g., bathrooms) to meet Accessible unit criteria is consistent with Group I-1, Condition 1 requirements. The requirement for two units is consistent with Group I-2, Condition 2 requirements. All common rooms are required to be fully accessible (see Section 1108.3). Section 1102 of ICC A117.1 provides the technical criteria for Accessible sleeping units.

1108.6.4.2 Type B units. In structures with four or more sleeping units intended to be occupied

===== Page 1314 =====
as a residence, every sleeping unit intended to be occupied as a residence shall be a Type B unit.

Exception: The number of Type B units is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Section 1108.7.

Since these types of facilities typically serve as a person's permanent residence, the sleeping unit must meet Type B criteria. The Accessible sleeping unit required by Section 1108.6.4.1 exceeds Type B unit requirements. The exception is a general reference to Section 1108.7, which addresses situations where it is logical to back off on the requirements for Type B units within a structure. Since Group R-4 is a congregate residence, this section would be applicable where four or more sleeping units are provided.

1108.7 General exceptions. Where specifically permitted by Section 1108.5 or 1108.6, the required number of Type A units and Type B units is permitted to be reduced in accordance with Sections 1108.7.1 through 1108.7.5.

Sections 1108.5 and 1108.6 establish where Accessible, Type A or Type B units are expected to be provided. Section 1108.7 covers the general exceptions where it is reasonable and logical to not provide accessibility for some of the units. This would be consistent with the general provisions of Section 1103.2.1. Code users should start out with the assumption that everything, in this case Group I and R dwelling and sleeping units, is required to be accessible, and then back off from that level of accessibility when specific exceptions are indicated. Note that there are no exceptions for Accessible units. While Type A units are mentioned in Section 1108.7.1, the only exception for Type A units is found in Section 1108.7.5.

Sections 1108.7.1 through 1108.7.4 primarily deal with nonelevator buildings. If elevators are provided, except as addressed in Section 1108.7.3, all units in the building are required to meet Type B criteria or better. Providing access to the upper floors in these cases would require either an elevator or a ramp system (or multiple elevators or ramps), both of which would be unreasonable. These exceptions are intended to be consistent with the scope of the FHAG. It should be noted that these are only exceptions to the requirements for Type B dwelling units.

In accordance with Section 1108.2, Accessible and Type A units provide a higher level of accessibility than Type B units. Therefore, if Accessible or Type A units are provided on the accessible levels, this would exceed Type B unit requirements. For clarity in the commentary for the exceptions, only Type B units will be mentioned.
1108.7.1 Structures without elevator service. Where no elevator service is provided in a structure, only the dwelling units and sleeping units that are located on stories indicated in Sections 1108.7.1.1 and 1108.7.1.2 are required to be Type A units and Type B units, respectively. The number of Type A units shall be determined in accordance with Section 1108.6.2.2.1.

In buildings without elevator service, only the floor levels indicated in Sections 1108.7.1.1 and 1108.7.1.2 are required to have dwelling and sleeping units that are Type A and Type B units, respectively. Floor levels that do not meet the criteria are not required to have an accessible route to that level, nor do the dwelling units or sleeping units on those levels have to meet Type A or Type B unit criteria. The building must still have the minimum number of Type A units required on the first floor.

1108.7.1.1 One story with Type B units required. At least one story containing dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occupied as a residence shall be provided with an accessible entrance from the exterior of the structure and all units intended to be occupied as a residence on that story shall be Type B units.

This section basically states that Type B units must be provided on at least one level of a building that is not equipped with elevator service. For example, on a flat site, a two-story structure with Type B dwelling units or sleeping units on the first floor would not require an accessible route to, or Type B units on, the second floor (see Commentary Figure 1108.7.1.1).

1108.7.1.2 Additional stories with Type B units. Where stories have entrances not included in determining compliance with Section 1108.7.1.1, and such entrances are proximate to arrival points intended to serve units on that story, as indicated in Items 1 and 2, all dwelling units and sleeping units intended to be occupied as a residence served by that entrance on that story shall be Type B units.

1 Where the slopes of the undisturbed site measured between the planned entrance and all vehicular or pedestrian arrival points within 15 m of the planned entrance are 10 percent or less, and

2 Where the slopes of the planned finished grade measured between the entrance and all vehicular or pedestrian arrival points within 15 m of the planned entrance are 10 percent or less.

Where arrival points are not within 15 m of the entrance, the closest arrival point shall be used to determine access unless that arrival point serves the

===== Page 1315 =====
story required by Section 1108.7.1.1.
This section addresses the idea that a building could have two levels that would be provided with accessible routes. This could be a structure built into a hill or a building with the first level a few meters down and the second level a few meters up from grade level [see Commentary Figure 1108.7.1.2(1)].

The basic test for multiple accessible levels is to check for the slope between the building entrance and any arrival points within a 15 m arc. If no arrival points (e.g., sidewalk, parking) are within that 15 m arc, the closest arrival point should be used as a reference. If the slope between these two points is 10 percent or less both before and after grading of the site, then an accessible route is required to that level [see Commentary Figure 1108.7.1.2(2) and Figure 1108.7.1.2(3)].

In the case of sidewalks, the closest point to the entrance will be where a public sidewalk entering the site intersects with the sidewalk to the entrance. In the case of resident parking areas, the closest point to the planned entrance will be measured from the entry point to the parking area that is located closest to the planned entrance. The measurement for elevation should be taken from the center of the entrance door to the top of the pavement at the arrival point.

1108.7.2 Multistory units. A multistory dwelling unit or sleeping unit that is not provided with elevator service is not required to be a Type B unit. Where a multistory unit is provided with external elevator service to only one floor, the floor provided with elevator service shall be the primary entry to the unit, shall comply with the requirements for a Type B unit and, where provided within the unit, a living area, a kitchen and a toilet facility shall be provided on that floor.

Section 1108.7.2 addresses “multistory units” (see the definition in Chapter 2). For example, the typical townhouse scenario, where there is a series of multistory units adjacent to each other in a single structure and no elevators are provided, would not require Type B units. If a townhouse has a private residence elevator, it would have to meet Type B criteria. In a multistory dwelling or sleeping unit that only has elevator access at one floor level, that level must be accessible and contain a living area kitchen and toilet facility [see Commentary Figure 1108.7.2(1) and Figure 1108.7.2(2)].

1108.7.3 Elevator service to the lowest story with units. Where elevator service in the building provides an accessible route only to the lowest story containing dwelling units or sleeping units intended to be occupied as a residence, only the units on that story that are intended to be occupied as a residence are required to be Type B units.

Section 1108.7.3 exempts dwelling units located on upper floors as long as the dwelling units on the first floor containing dwelling units are at least Type B units. For example, a three-story structure has a business on the first floor with apartments on the second and third levels. An accessible route is required to the second level, and all dwelling units on that level are required to be Type B units; however, an accessible route and Type B units are not required to the third level. (Note: If an elevator is utilized to provide access to only the lowest level containing dwelling or sleeping units, this building would not be considered an “elevator” building.) See Commentary Figure 1108.7.3(1) and Figure 1108.7.3(2).

1108.7.4 Site impracticality. On a site with multiple non-elevator buildings, the number of units required by Section 1108.7.1 to be Type B units is permitted to be reduced to a percentage that is equal to the percentage of the entire site having grades, prior to development, that are less than 10 percent, provided that all of the following conditions are met:

1 Not less than 20 percent of the units required by Section 1108.7.1 on the site are Type B units.

2 Units required by Section 1108.7.1, where the slope between the building entrance serving the units on that story and a pedestrian or vehicular arrival point is no greater than 8.33 percent, are Type B units.

3 Units required by Section 1108.7.1, where an elevated walkway is planned between a building entrance serving the units on that story and a pedestrian or vehicular arrival point and the slope between them is 10 percent or less, are Type B units.

4 Units served by an elevator in accordance with Section 1108.7.3 are Type B units.

Section 1108.7.4 addresses multiple buildings on a sloping site. For example, if an apartment complex was built on a steep or hilly site, the number of Type B dwelling units required on the ground floor could be reduced because of the difficulty of providing accessible routes. A minimum of 20 percent of the total ground floor units on the site must be Type B units, regardless of site complications (see Commentary Figure 1108.7.4).

1108.7.5 Flood hazard areas. Type A units and Type B units shall not be required for buildings without elevator service that are located in flood hazard areas, where the minimum required

===== Page 1316 =====
elevation of the lowest floor or lowest supporting horizontal structural member, as applicable, results in all of the following:

1 A difference in elevation between the minimum required floor elevation at the primary entrances and vehicular and pedestrian arrival points within 15 m exceeding 750 mm, and

2 A slope exceeding 10 percent between the minimum required floor elevation at the primary entrances and vehicular and pedestrian arrival points within 15 m.

Where such arrival points are not within 15 m of the primary entrances, the closest arrival points shall be used.

Residential structures in flood hazard areas must be elevated. If, based on the required floor elevation, the criteria in either Item 1 or 2 are met, it is considered that an accessible route to the units is not feasible. This section applies to both Type A and Type B dwelling units [see Commentary Figures 1108.7.5(1) and 1108.7.5(2)].

Flood-resistant requirements address, in part, concerns about public safety. The code provides for reductions in the level of accessibility in residential facilities without elevators that are elevated to comply with Section 1612. Note that the exception is based on the minimum required lowest floor elevation, which is relative to the elevation of the design flood. If the first-floor elevation is higher than the required elevation by choice, the measurement would still be from the minimum required elevation rather than the actual floor elevation.

## SECTION 1109 SPECIAL OCCUPANCIES

1109.1 General. In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, the requirements of Sections 1109.2 through 1109.4 shall apply to specific occupancies.

The criteria provided herein are occupancy specific, and are intended to result in a reasonable level of accessibility in areas with assembly seating, self-service storage facilities and judicial facilities.

1109.2 Assembly area seating. A building, room or space used for assembly purposes with fixed seating shall comply with Sections 1109.2.1 through 1109.2.5. Lawn seating shall comply with Section 1109.2.6. Assistive listening systems shall comply with Section 1109.2.7. Performance areas viewed from assembly seating areas shall comply with Section 1109.2.8. Dining areas shall comply with Section 1109.2.9.
Sections 1109.2.1 through 1109.2.5 specifically address facilities with fixed seating utilized for purposes of viewing an event, typically facilities and spaces of occupancies of Groups A-1, A-3, A-4 and A-5. These criteria would also be applicable in assembly-type spaces with fixed seats that are located in buildings of other occupancies. Assembly spaces with fixed seating must provide accessible viewing locations that have: access to services; the number of wheelchair spaces and their associated companion seats dispersed so that persons using wheelchair spaces have options; and designated aisle seats. Lawn seating is a unique type of seating arrangement that is typically exterior and not associated with fixed seating. When there is a stage or platform associated with the assembly space, assistive listening systems and performance areas are addressed. The requirements for seating in areas for eating or drinking, typically Group A-2 spaces or facilities, and the dispersion of this seating are addressed in Section 1109.2.9.

1109.2.1 Services. If a service or facility is provided in an area that is not accessible, the same service or facility shall be provided on an accessible level and shall be accessible.

This section establishes an important concept. The intent is that all types of services provided by a facility must be accessible. For example, after providing and dispersing wheelchair spaces in a venue, and because of tiered seating to provide a line of sight to the event, a stadium may have many tiers or sections of seating that are not accessible. This section establishes that if a souvenir stand is located in or near that non-accessible section, one of three circumstances would apply: an additional souvenir stand must be provided in the facility on an accessible level; the souvenir stand would have to be relocated to an accessible level; or the area where the souvenir stand is located must be made accessible. This section also emphasizes that not only must that service or facility be located on an accessible level, but the service itself must also be accessible. Obviously, it would be inappropriate to locate a souvenir stand on an accessible level if the approach or entrance to that stand is inaccessible.

1109.2.2 Wheelchair spaces. In rooms and spaces used for assembly purposes with fixed seating, accessible wheelchair spaces shall be provided in accordance with Sections 1109.2.2.1 through 1109.2.2.3.

This section is intended to provide a reasonable number of spaces in an assembly occupancy with fixed seating to accommodate

===== Page 1317 =====
persons who use wheelchairs or scooters. Demographic statistics from the National Center for Health Statistics on the number of noninstitutionalized Americans who use wheelchairs indicate that these requirements are realistic. These required wheelchair spaces consist of an open, available floor space in which the wheelchair takes the place of the fixed seat that would otherwise occupy that space. Section 1109.2.3 is consistent with ICC A117.1 in requiring companion seating adjacent to each wheelchair space.

1109.2.2.1 General seating. Wheelchair spaces shall be provided in accordance with Table 1109.2.2.1.

The number of required wheelchair spaces is indicated in Table 1109.2.2.1 and is based on the total number of fixed seats set up to view the same event, with the exception of box seats covered in Sections 1109.2.2.2 and 1109.2.2.3. For example, the fixed seating on all levels and all types provided in a sports stadium, excluding box seats, is used to calculate the number of required wheelchair spaces for general seating. The requirements for box- or suite-type seating are calculated separately. Seating provided in different rooms, such as in a series of lecture halls in a university, must be calculated separately. Note that the percentage of wheelchair spaces is less for facilities with a capacity of more than 5,000. The industry has been able to provide statistics to show that the higher percentage of wheelchair spaces is not typically utilized in large facilities.

This table sets forth the required number of wheelchair spaces based on the capacity of seating in the space containing the fixed seating. Any fixed seating with less than four seats is not required to provide wheelchair spaces. There are special criteria for wheelchair spaces in facilities with seating capacities of over 500 and over 5,000. For example, six wheelchair spaces would be required for an assembly space with a seating capacity of 500. Seven wheelchair spaces would be required for a seating capacity of 501 through 650. Both of the last two rows use the term "or fraction thereof" to designate the next step up.

1109.2.2.2 Luxury boxes, club boxes and suites. In each luxury box, club box and suite within arenas, stadiums and grandstands, wheelchair spaces shall be provided in accordance with Table 1109.2.2.1.

Where luxury boxes, club boxes or suites are provided, each luxury box, club box or suite must have an accessible route to that box and at least one wheelchair space and associated companion space. If the luxury box, club box or suite has more than 25 seats, the number of required wheelchair spaces is increased in accordance with Table 1109.2.2.1. For example, if a stadium has three luxury boxes with 51 seats in each, at least four wheelchair spaces and their associated companion seats must be provided in each box. While the total of all three luxury boxes (i.e., 153 occupants) would only require five total wheelchair spaces, these specific types of boxes must be calculated individually.

Luxury boxes are most commonly found in larger facilities, thus the reference to arenas, stadiums and grandstands. Boxes that are portions of balconies, such as in an opera house, or boxes separated by rails in general seating areas, such as behind home plate in baseball stadiums, are addressed in Section 1109.2.2.3

1109.2.2.3 Other boxes. In boxes other than those required to comply with Section 1109.2.2.2, the total number of wheelchair spaces provided shall be determined in accordance with Table 1109.2.2.1. Wheelchair spaces shall be located in not less than 20 percent of all boxes provided.

Examples of the boxes covered in this section are the seats separated by railings or low walls behind home plate in a baseball stadium [see Commentary Figure 1109.2.2.3(1)], or side balconies in opera houses [see Commentary Figure 1109.2.2.3(2)]. Luxury boxes are typically located on a separate level, and are often attached to some type of party room behind a group of seats.

Where boxes other than luxury boxes, club boxes or suites are provided, at least 20 percent of the boxes must have an accessible route to that box and at least one wheelchair space and associated companion space in that box. The total number of box seats is utilized to calculate the total number of required wheelchair spaces in accordance with Table 1109.2.2.1. For example, if a stadium has five boxes with 51 seats in each, the total of all five boxes (i.e., 255 occupants) would require five total wheelchair spaces. The wheelchair spaces could be located in one box (i.e., 20 percent minimum) or dispersed to all five boxes. Note that there is additional dispersion criteria for assembly seating based on lines of sight in Section 802.9 of ICC A117.1, as well as dispersion by level in Section 1109.2.4.

1109.2.3 Companion seats. At least one companion seat shall be provided for each wheelchair space required by Sections 1109.2.2.1 through 1109.2.2.3.

A companion seat allows a friend, relative, associate, etc., to accompany a person using a

===== Page 1318 =====
wheelchair at an event and to share in the experience with the same level of companionship as others attending the event. The ICC A117.1 standard permits two wheelchair spaces to be located next to each other; however, each wheelchair space must also be adjacent to at least one companion seat. Accessible seating areas are sometimes provided with nonfixed companion chairs allowing the users to adjust the adjacency of seats and wheelchair spaces to their liking. If fixed seats are provided, the companion seat must have shoulder alignment with the person using the wheelchair space.

1109.2.4 Dispersion of wheelchair spaces in multilevel assembly seating areas. In multilevel assembly seating areas, wheelchair spaces shall be provided on the main floor level and on one of each two additional floor or mezzanine levels. Wheelchair spaces shall be provided in each luxury box, club box and suite within assembly facilities.

Exceptions:

1. In multilevel assembly seating areas where the second floor or mezzanine level contains 25 percent or less of the total seating capacity, wheelchair spaces shall be permitted to all be located on the main level.

2. In multilevel assembly seating areas where the second floor or mezzanine level provides 25 percent or less of the total seating capacity and 300 or fewer seats, all wheelchair spaces shall be permitted to be located on the main level.

3. Wheelchair spaces in team or player seating serving areas of sport activity are not required to be dispersed.

Where facilities provide seating on multiple levels, wheelchair spaces must also be provided on multiple levels. For example, if a theater has a main level and a balcony level, wheelchair spaces must be provided on both. If a theater has a main level and two balcony levels, wheelchair spaces must be provided on the main level and at least one of the two balcony levels. While the term "level" is difficult to define in some assembly arrangements, the intent is to provide the wheelchair user with a choice of seating similar to what is available to all persons in the space. A "level" is not each time that there is a step-down to another row of seating. Multilevel seating facilities are typically separate floor levels, commonly referred to as balconies. Subjective judgment on the part of both the designer and the building official is required for each individual facility.

There are three specific exceptions to this multilevel dispersion requirement. Exception 1 is applicable to assembly spaces utilized for worship services. There is typically not a cost or line-of-sight issue in this type of facility, as there is in other assembly seating areas. The balcony is not required to contain accessible seating or have an accessible route, as long as accessible seating is provided on the main level and the balcony does not contain more than 25 percent of the seating.

Exception 2 is applicable to balconies in assembly facilities with a limited number of seats in the upper level. If accessible seating is provided on the main level and the balcony contains less than 25 percent of the seating and less than 300 seats, then the balcony is not required to contain accessible seating or have an accessible route. This can be used for small theaters with up to 900 seats on the main floor and 300 seats on the balcony.

Exception 3 relieves the requirement for wheelchair space dispersion among the various team or player seating options that may be provided in a facility. However, there must be at least one wheelchair space for each team.

The dispersion requirements in the code must be combined with the additional wheelchair dispersion requirements in ICC A117.1, including side to side (horizontally) across a venue, front to back (variety of distances) within the seating, and by type (distinct service or amenities) of seating. The standard also looks at requirements for line of sight or seated or standing spectators. Wheelchair spaces and their associated companion seats may be grouped, but must, at a minimum, be distributed into the number of locations indicated in Table 802.10 of ICC A117.1.

For requirements for accessible means of egress from these wheelchair spaces, please see Section 1009.1, Exception 2 and Section 1030.8.

1109.2.5 Designated aisle seats. At least 5 percent, but not less than one, of the total number of aisle seats provided shall be designated aisle seats and shall be the aisle seats located closest to accessible routes.

Exception: Designated aisle seats are not required in team or player seating serving areas of sport activity.

Designated aisle seats allow some persons with mobility impairments to be able to easily access certain seats along aisles. Due to an impairment, it may be difficult or impossible for some to move further into the narrow space between rows. It is not the intent of the designated aisle seats to be transfer locations. The person using this space can be someone

===== Page 1319 =====
using a walker, crutches or cane or anyone who may have difficulty with steps; hence, the requirement that the designated aisle seats be close to accessible routes. When seats have armrests, ICC A117.1 requires each designated aisle seat to have a folding or retractable armrest allowing easier access or better fit.

1109.2.6 Lawn seating. Lawn seating areas and exterior overflow seating areas, where fixed seats are not provided, shall connect to an accessible route.

Lawn seating on both flat and sloped sites is fairly common at less formal venues. It may be the only type of seating provided or one of several options. Sometimes lawns are overflow areas, with or without movable chairs, located beyond the fixed seating areas. In any case, these lawn areas must be located on an accessible route. Access onto the lawn seating depends on the ability of the person and/or assistance from companions (see Commentary Figure 1109.2.6).

1109.2.7 Assistive listening systems. Each building, room or space used for assembly purposes where audible communications are integral to the use of the space shall have an assistive listening system.

Exception: Other than in courtrooms, an assistive listening system is not required where there is no audio amplification system.

This section is intended to accommodate people with a hearing impairment. Assembly seating areas, such as stadiums, theaters, auditoriums, lecture halls and similar spaces, are required to make provisions for the use of assistive listening devices in accordance with Section 1109.2.7.1 and Table 1109.2.7.1. In these assembly areas, audible communication is often integral to the use and full enjoyment of the space. This requirement offers the possibility for individuals with hearing impairments to attend functions in these facilities without having to give advance notice and without disrupting the event in order to have a portable assistive listening system set up and made ready for use.

There are three primary types of listening systems available: induction loop, AM/FM and infrared. Each type of system has certain advantages and disadvantages that the designer should take into consideration when choosing the type of system that is most appropriate for the intended application. Signage notifying the general public of the availability of these systems must be provided in accordance with Section 1112.4.
If an audio amplification system is not provided within a facility, an assistive listening system is not required. Given the essential nature of the proceedings, this exception is not applicable to courtrooms. All courtrooms must have an assistive listening system.

1109.2.7.1 Receivers. The number and type of receivers shall be provided for assistive listening systems in accordance with Table 1109.2.7.1.

Exceptions:

1. Where a building contains more than one room or space used for assembly purposes, the total number of required receivers shall be permitted to be calculated based on the total number of seats in the building, provided that all receivers are usable with all systems and if the rooms or spaces used for assembly purposes required to provide assistive listening are under one management.

2. Where all seats in a building, room or space used for assembly purposes are served by an induction loop assistive listening system, the minimum number of receivers required by Table 1109.2.7.1 to be hearing aid compatible shall not be required.

Table 1109.2.7.1 specifies the number and types of receivers that must be available to use in an assembly area. Exception 1 states that if a facility has more than one assembly space with an audio amplification system, such as a multiplex theater, then the total seating for all the spaces may be used to determine the number of receivers required.

Exception 2 states that because induction loop technology renders an entire space accessible to the assistive listening system, hearing-aid compatible receivers are not necessary.

See Table 1109.2.7.1.

Table 1109.2.7.1 specifies the number and type of required receivers in an assembly occupancy. At least 25 percent of the receivers provided (but not fewer than two receivers) must be hearing-aid compatible, as persons with hearing aids typically cannot use earpieces or headphone-equipped receivers. When determining the general number of receivers required, the table is to be applied as though it reads "2 plus 1 for each additional 25 over 50, or a fraction thereof." For example, where 51 to 75 total seats are provided, three assistive listening devices are required. Where 76 to 100 total seats are provided, four assistive listening devices are required.

The number of required receivers is based on the capacity of the assembly areas. Note that as the size of the assembly area increases, the

===== Page 1320 =====
number of required receivers also increases. However, the percentage of receivers to seats decreases. This is based on the actual usage in large assembly areas.

1109.2.7.2 Ticket windows. Where ticket windows are provided in stadiums and arenas, at least one window at each location shall have an assistive listening system.

An assistive-listening system is required at one window in each location where tickets are sold. Note that this is limited to stadiums and arenas where it is assumed that the technology is already provided for inside the space (see Section 1109.2.7). This will allow a person with a hearing impairment to be able to communicate with the ticket salesperson regarding date, cost and location of tickets being purchased. The New York Yankees and Minnesota Twins currently use induction-loop systems at their stadium ticket windows.

1109.2.7.3 Public address systems. Where stadiums, arenas and grandstands have 15,000 fixed seats or more and provide audible public announcements, they shall also provide pre-recorded or real-time captions of those audible public announcements.

If stadiums, arenas or grandstands provide public announcements, the same information should be displayed on some type of electronic signage. With seating of 15,000 or more, most stadiums, arenas and grandstands have electronic scoreboards that are capable of displaying text messages. This is especially important when dealing with emergency evacuation situations. Pre-recorded messages related to emergencies should be worked out with the fire department as part of the fire and safety evacuation plans [see Section 404 of SBC 801]. Fire alarm systems for assembly occupations (Section 907.2.1.1) with an occupant load of 1,000 or more must include an emergency voice/alarm communication system. Where captioned audible public announcements are required for stadiums by this section, the emergency voice/alarm communication system must also be captioned (see Section 907.2.1.2). Specific criteria are provided in Section 907.5.2.2.4.

ICC A117.1 has new provisions for variable message signs (VMS), which provide guidance for appropriate case, style, size, spacing, contrast and rate of change. There are special allowances that address large assembly occupancies and the distance from the viewer to the sign.

1109.2.8 Performance areas. An accessible route shall directly connect the performance area to the assembly seating area where a circulation path directly connects a performance area to an assembly seating area. An accessible route shall be provided from performance areas to ancillary areas or facilities used by performers.

Performance areas, such as stages, orchestra pits, band platforms, choir lofts and similar spaces, must be accessible. If there is a direct route from the seating to the performance area, there must also be an accessible route. For example, if steps are provided from the assembly seating area to the stage within the theater, then an accessible route (e.g., a ramp or platform lift) to the stage must also be provided within the theater. An accessible route must also be provided to any ancillary areas, such as green rooms or practice/warm-up rooms. The intent is that a person with mobility impairments could participate in the event. This could include high-school graduation with students coming from the audience onto the stage to receive their diplomas; participating with the community band; playing in the orchestra for a performance; acting in a production; or giving a speech. Technical production areas for the stage, such as catwalks, are exempted under Section 1103.2.7.

1109.2.9 Dining and drinking areas. In dining and drinking areas, all interior and exterior floor areas shall be accessible and be on an accessible route.

Exceptions:

1. An accessible route between accessible levels and stories above or below is not required where permitted by Section 1104.4, Exception 1.

2. An accessible route to dining and drinking areas in a mezzanine is not required, provided that the mezzanine contains less than 25 percent of the total combined area for dining and drinking and the same services, and decor are provided in the accessible area.

3. In sports facilities, tiered dining areas providing seating required to be accessible shall be required to have accessible routes serving at least 25 percent of the dining area, provided that accessible routes serve accessible seating and where each tier is provided with the same services.

4. Employee-only work areas shall comply with Sections 1103.2.2 and 1104.3.1.

Dining and drinking areas most frequently occur in Group A-2 buildings (restaurants, cafeterias, dinner theaters, etc.). While Sections 1109.2.2 through 1109.2.5 deal with fixed seating only, these provisions apply to all

===== Page 1321 =====
areas with dining and drinking surfaces regardless of whether those surfaces are provided by furniture or something built-in, such as a bar or booths. This section requires the total floor area allotted for dining and drinking to be on an accessible route, including areas with tables and chairs, bar seating, standing spaces, gaming areas, outdoor decks, etc. An accessible route would be required to dining areas that are raised or lowered. The intent is that a person with a disability may not be able to get to every seat, but that person would still have a choice of tables.

Exception 1, with a reference back to Exception 1 in Section 1104.4, exempts a basement, mezzanine or second floor from being served by an accessible route, provided that the aggregate area of the nonaccessible levels is 279 m² or less. Keep in mind that a mezzanine is required by Section 505.2 to have a clear height below of at least 2100 mm. Therefore, Exception 1 cannot be applied to platforms or raised or lowered floor areas. Exception 2 is intended to acknowledge a practical and reasonable limitation in buildings with a mezzanine level that provides less than 25 percent of the total area for dining and drinking. In addition, all services and amenities provided in the mezzanine must also be available in an accessible area. Any mezzanine condition that does not meet the criteria of this exception does not qualify for the exception and must be served by an accessible route. Nonqualifying examples are as follows: a dining mezzanine that contains 25 percent or more of the total dining area; a raised or depressed dining area that is not actually a mezzanine; and a mezzanine level that contains the only area where a specific service or amenity is provided, like a bar or private party room. The area of the mezzanine is not limited by this exception to 279 m²; it could be a larger area or a smaller area.

Exception 3 is for sports facilities. Some sports facilities also have accommodations for dining or picnicking while watching the event. For line-of-sight issues, the dining terraces are tiered. If the same services are available on the accessible level as any other level, only 25 percent of the dining area is required to be on an accessible route.

At this time, the code does not contain specific information on tiered dining facilities that also have the issue of line of sight for viewing an event, such as a dinner theater, movie theaters that offer dining during a show, or dinner seating during a sports event such as at a racetrack. These types of spaces may want to look at the provisions for both dining (see Section 1109.2.9) and seating for viewing an event (see Section 1109.2.2) and develop a reasonable compromise.

Exception 4 is simply a reference to employee work area exceptions. Employee work areas may be within the mezzanine levels, such as the area behind a bar.
1109.2.9.1 Dining surfaces. Where dining surfaces for the consumption of food or drink are provided, at least 5 percent, but not less than one, of the dining surfaces for the seating and standing spaces shall be accessible and be distributed throughout the facility and located on a level accessed by an accessible route.

A dining facility may offer spaces for people to eat or drink at tables, booths, bars and counters (see Commentary Figure 1109.2.9.1). These requirements are applicable to both movable and built-in surfaces. The numbers provided at all dining surfaces are used to determine the total. Five percent of the total of these spaces must allow for a person in a wheelchair to move to and sit at that location. The accessible surfaces are also required to be distributed throughout the facility but are not necessarily required to be dispersed by type. This requirement, in conjunction with Section 1109.2.9, should provide a variety of seating options. There are many considerations. For example, a table may be at the right height and provide knee and toe clearances, but the aisle and aisle accessway layout only allows for one or two approaches to the table. A booth may allow clearance at the end, but the location may not work out if a person sitting at that location may get bumped repeatedly by wait staff and customers trying to move in and out of the area, so this may be an operational issue for the restaurant. There are practical reasons to not require distribution by type. You could take the booth seat off one side to provide better access to a booth, but then you have banquet seating. If you require a high table to be lowered, you no longer have a high table.

The issue of whether a portion of a dining counter in a restaurant is required to be lowered to be accessible is subjective. The assumption is that if other types of seating are provided adjacent to the counter, then services provided at the counter will also be available at the adjacent seating. Therefore, if adequate accessible seating is available adjacent to the bar area, the bar is not required to be lowered. If the bar is the only eating or dining surface in a restaurant, or in a separate room in the restaurant, then a portion of the bar must be made accessible.

1109.3 Self-service storage facilities. Self-service storage facilities shall provide accessible individual

===== Page 1322 =====
self-storage spaces in accordance with Table 1109.3.

This section addresses facilities that provide self-storage units or spaces. These types of facilities are often storage garages located in long rows. Some facilities also provide climate-controlled storage within large multistory warehouses. The key is that the storage is moved in and out and accessed by the renter of the space. The intent is to provide access for persons with disabilities to this service without requiring the entire facility to be accessible. The minimum number of accessible spaces is based on the total number of self-storage spaces available in a facility.

109.3.1 Dispersion. Accessible individual self-service storage spaces shall be dispersed throughout the various classes of spaces provided. Where more classes of spaces are provided than the number of required accessible spaces, the number of accessible spaces shall not be required to exceed that required by Table 1109.3. Accessible spaces are permitted to be dispersed in a single building of a multiple-building facility.

Self-storage facilities may offer a variety of spaces, such as heated/nonheated, different sizes, etc. If the variety offered is greater than the number of accessible spaces required, the accessible spaces should be dispersed as much as possible. For example, if a facility offers the choice of a 3 m by 3 m unit and a 3 m by 6 m unit, but only one accessible space is required, then only one unit is required to be accessible. The choice of which unit is made accessible is up to the building owner or designer. When a facility has multiple buildings, accessible spaces are permitted to be located in a single building. This is in consideration that many of these facilities do not have paved roads to access them. This allows for only a small portion of the site to be considered when looking at arrival points, accessible routes and entrances.

At this time, ICC A117.1 does not provide specific information on how to make a self-service storage unit accessible. Since overhead doors are not typically considered accessible, alternatives to be discussed between the owner/designer and building official are the possibility of man doors on the side of the unit or electric garage door openers.

1109.4 Judicial facilities. Judicial facilities shall comply with Sections 1109.4.1 and 1109.4.2.

Accessibility in judicial facilities includes access to all public areas as well as special requirements for the courtrooms, holding cells and visitation areas. This section was added for coordination with new requirements for judicial facilities from the DOJ. For requirements addressing lawyer/client visitation spaces, see Section 1110.12.2.

1109.4.1 Courtrooms. Each courtroom shall be accessible and comply with Sections 1109.4.1.1 through 1109.4.1.5.

All courtrooms are required to be accessible for participants at every level. This would include participation as an employee of the court, counselor, litigant, juror, witness or observer. All courtrooms must be on an accessible route from both the public side and courtroom staff side. The waiting areas, lawyer meeting rooms and vestibules that are sometimes located immediately adjacent to the courtroom entrance must be accessible. Access must be readily available to the gallery, as well as the witness stand and jury box. Members of the jury must have an accessible route to the jury delivery room. The witness box in a courtroom is often raised to have a line of sight between the judge and witness. It is not acceptable to ask someone to testify from an area outside the box; therefore, the witness box must always be accessible. Elements would include an accessible route to all portions of the courtroom unless limited by the following subsections which identify areas and features of courtrooms that have specific accessibility requirements.

An accessible route must also be available between the courtroom and the association holding cells addressed in Section 1109.4.2.

1109.4.1.1 Jury box. A wheelchair space shall be provided within the jury box.

Exception: Adjacent companion seating is not required.

Jury boxes may be configured in numerous ways, including with multiple tiers. At least one wheelchair space within the "box" is required. A wheelchair space adjacent to (or outside of) the jury box could not be used to satisfy the requirement. Since only jury members are seated in the jury box, companion seating is not required.

1109.4.1.2 Gallery seating. Wheelchair spaces shall be provided in accordance with Table 1109.2.2.1. Designated aisle seats shall be provided in accordance with Section 1109.2.5.

Gallery seating in a courtroom is regulated similarly to other assembly seating areas with respect to wheelchair spaces, associated companion seating and designated aisle seats.

1109.4.1.3 Assistive listening systems. An assistive listening system must be provided. Receivers shall be provided for the assistive listening system in accordance with Section 1109.2.7.1.

Every courtroom must have an assistive listening system. Unlike other assembly

===== Page 1323 =====
occupancies, the requirement is not dependent on an audio amplification system being provided. The assumption is that any person in a courtroom with a hearing impairment should be provided with an enhanced ability to hear the proceedings when desired. Issues of privacy may dictate the type of system provided within the courtrooms. Signage indicating that assistive listening devices are available is required and is typically located near the public entry to the courtroom (see Section 1112.4).

1109.4.1.4 Employee workstations. The judge's bench, clerk's station, bailiff's station, deputy clerk's station and court reporter's station shall be located on an accessible route. The vertical access to elevated employee workstations within a courtroom is not required at the time of initial construction, provided a ramp, lift or elevator can be installed without requiring reconfiguration or extension of the courtroom or extension of the electrical system.

Employee workstations in courtrooms are permitted to be constructed as adaptable for a future accessible route if and when a route is necessary for a mobility impaired employee. Depending on the type of courtroom (e.g., panel, trial, jury, traffic), employee workstations will vary. The judge is typically raised to establish a level of authority over the courtroom and to have his or her eyes approximately level with those of the standing lawyers. Associated clerk stations are raised to ease interaction with the judge. The vertical portion of the accessible route (ramp, platform lift, elevator) can be an adapting element and is expected to be predesigned and readily incorporated into the courtroom when needed. This option is consistent with the modification for employees based on the need of the employee expressed in Section 1103.2.2. This option does not apply to the raised public areas in courtrooms, namely, witness stands, jury boxes and galleries, which are required to be constructed accessible.

1109.4.1.5 Other workstations. The litigant's and counsel stations, including the lectern, shall be accessible.

The well of the court typically contains the area for the litigant's and counselor's tables and a lectern for lawyers to address the judge and/or jury. Depending on the courtroom, this configuration may vary. Both defendant and prosecutor tables should be constructed appropriately for a front approach for workstations (see Commentary Figure 1109.4.1.5). The lectern can be adjustable so that it can work for lawyers seated in wheelchairs as well as those standing.
1109.4.2 Holding cells. Central holding cells and court-floor holding cells shall comply with Sections 1109.4.2.1 and 1109.4.2.2.

Where holding cells are provided, Sections 1109.4.2.1 and 1109.4.2.2 indicate which cells shall be accessible.

1109.4.2.1 Central holding cells. Where separate central holding cells are provided for adult males, juvenile males, adult females or juvenile females, one of each type shall be accessible. Where central holding cells are provided and are not separated by age or sex, at least one accessible cell shall be provided.

At least one central holding cell is required to be accessible. If separate holding cells are provided for males and females or to separate juvenile offenders from the adult offenders, at least one of each type is required to be accessible.

1109.4.2.2 Court-floor holding cells. Where separate court floor holding cells are provided for adult males, juvenile males, adult females or juvenile females, each courtroom shall be served by one accessible cell of each type. Where court-floor holding cells are provided and are not separated by age or sex, courtrooms shall be served by at least one accessible cell.

Accessible cells shall be permitted to serve more than one courtroom.

For security reasons, these holding cells may be provided on each floor of the facility in order to have the detainees as close to the courtrooms they are to appear in as possible. At least one holding cell per floor is required to be accessible. One accessible holding cell could serve all the courtrooms on one floor. If separate holding cells are provided for males and females or to separate juvenile offenders from the adult offenders, at least one of each type is required to be accessible.

## SECTION 1110 OTHER FEATURES AND FACILITIES

1110.1 General. Accessible building features and facilities shall be provided in accordance with Sections 1110.2 through 1110.16.

Exception: Accessible units, Type A units and Type B units shall comply with Chapter 10 of ICC A117.1.

This section clarifies that the provisions of Section 1110 are applicable in addition to all other requirements of Chapter 11. For example, although Section 1110.2 sets forth accessibility requirements for toilet rooms and bathing facilities within a store, it is not intended to mean that these are the only accessibility requirements that are applicable to stores. The building features and facilities covered by this

===== Page 1324 =====
section are required to be accessible to the extent set forth herein. The exception is a reminder that Accessible Type A and Type B dwelling and sleeping units should comply with Chapter 11 of ICC A117.1 within the individual dwelling units. Common and public areas associated with Group R-2 and R-3

1110.2 Toilet and bathing facilities. Each toilet room and bathing room shall be accessible. Where a floor level is not required to be connected by an accessible route, the only toilet rooms or bathing rooms provided within the facility shall not be located on the inaccessible floor. Except as provided for in Sections 1110.2.4 and 1110.2.5, at least one of each type of fixture, element, control or dispenser in each accessible toilet room and bathing room shall be accessible.

## Exceptions:

1. Toilet rooms or bathing rooms accessed only through a private office, not for common or public use and intended for use by a single occupant, shall be permitted to comply with the specific exceptions in ICC A117.1.

2. This section is not applicable to toilet and bathing rooms that serve dwelling units or sleeping units that are not required to be accessible by Section 1108.

3. Where multiple single-user toilet rooms or bathing rooms are clustered at a single location, at least 50 percent but not less than one room for each use at each cluster shall be accessible.

4. Where no more than one urinal is provided in a toilet room or bathing room, the urinal is not required to be accessible.

5. Toilet rooms or bathing rooms that are part of critical care or intensive care patient sleeping rooms serving Accessible units are not required to be accessible.

6. Toilet rooms or bathing rooms designed for bariatrics patients are not required to comply with the toilet room and bathing room requirement in ICC A117.1. The sleeping units served by bariatrics toilet or bathing rooms shall not count toward the required number of Accessible sleeping units.

7. Where permitted in Section 1108, in toilet rooms or bathrooms serving Accessible units, water closets designed for assisted toileting shall comply with Section 1110.2.2.
8. Where permitted in Section 1108, in bathrooms serving Accessible units, showers designed for assisted bathing shall comply with Section 1110.2.3.

9. Where toilet facilities are primarily for children’s use, required accessible water closets, toilet compartments and lavatories shall be permitted to comply with children’s provision of ICC A117.1.

This section generally requires all toilet rooms and bathing rooms provided to be accessible. A person using a wheelchair must be able to approach and enter the room. Within the toilet room and/or bathing room, a minimum of one of each element or fixture provided is required to be accessible. Elements and fixtures include such things as water closets, lavatories, mirrors, towel dispensers, hand dryers and any other device that is installed and intended for use by the occupants of the room. Showers and bathtubs are both considered bathing fixtures, but not as different types of bathing fixtures. If a shower and a bathtub are both provided in the same bathing room, only one is required to be accessible. The designer or owner can choose which one. Requirements for the total number of bathing and toilet rooms are in Chapter 29 of the code [which is duplicated from Section 403 of SBC 701]. Large assembly and mercantile occupancies must also include a family or assisted use toilet room in addition to their other toilet facilities (see commentary, Section 1110.2.1). Facilities with more than 20 toilet compartments or 20 lavatories in a single toilet room should also comply with Sections 1110.2.2 and 1110.2.3. Provisions for accessible bathrooms are required even on levels that are not accessed by an accessible route. Many people benefit from the accessibility provisions in accessible bathrooms. For example, a person who is arthritic can use the grab bars to stand up and sit down, as well as finding the lever handles on the lavatory easier to use. In addition, Title I of the ADA might require that level to be made accessible as part of an employee modification. If the bathroom is already accessible, it does not need to be modified, thus reducing the changes that need to be made to the building. ICC A117.1 is the document referenced for all accessible toilet room requirements. The technical requirements in ICC A117.1 are based on allowing a person in a wheelchair to perform a side transfer [see Commentary Figure 1110.2(1)]. Maintaining a clear floor space at each fixture is important [see Commentary Figure 1110.2(2) for possible configurations]. The single-occupant bathroom requirements in the 2010 ADA Standard are

===== Page 1325 =====
now consistent with the provisions in ICC A117.1.

Exception 1 addresses a condition in which a toilet room or bathing room is permitted to be adaptable rather than fully accessible. The intent is that if a toilet room is part of an individual office and serves only the occupant of that office, the adaptable toilet room can be readily modified to be fully accessible based on that individual's needs. Preplanning during construction and design will facilitate future alterations. The ICC A117.1 indicates exactly what those adaptable features can be (e.g., reversible door swing; water closet seat height; blocking for grab bars; removable cabinets under the lavatory). This is not intended to be a general exception to allow a very small bathroom that would require fixtures related to provide accessibility at a later date. The bathrooms must be sized to be accessible.

Exception 2 is intended to correlate with the provisions of Section 1108, which establish the minimum number of facilities required to be Accessible, Type A or Type B units. Without this exception, the code would literally be requiring accessible fixtures in inaccessible dwelling and sleeping units. It is important to note that the bathrooms associated with required Accessible, Type A and Type B dwelling and sleeping units must comply with the requirements in Chapter 10 of ICC A117.1. Exception 3 specifies that where toilet rooms are clustered together (e.g., entrance doors next to each other or across the hall), not all need to be accessible. In such configurations, typically found in a doctor's office or drug test center, the requirement is reduced to a 50-percent minimum. If these toilet rooms are clustered in separate locations, such as in a multi-clinic facility, the 50-percent minimum would be applied to each cluster. A single-occupant women's bathroom adjacent to a single-occupant men's bathroom is not considered a cluster since they each serve a different sex. SBC 701 does have an allowance that would let some small occupancies have two unisex single-occupant toilet rooms, rather than having the same rooms labeled men's and women's (see Section 2902.2). If these toilet rooms are clustered, they can use this 50-percent exception since they are the same type.

Exception 4—SBC 701 permits urinals to be substituted for water closets to a maximum of 67 percent in each toilet room (see Section 419.2 of SBC 701). Exception 4 states that if only one urinal is provided within a toilet room, that urinal is not required to be accessible. This situation would typically only occur in toilet rooms that also had one water closet compartment.

Exception 5—While Exception 2 would exempt all the nonaccessible patient rooms in a hospital from accessible bathroom requirements, Exception 5 is also intended to exempt the Accessible units that may be provided within the critical-care or intensive-care units from requiring accessible bathrooms. In critical-care or intensive-care units, the patients are often too ill to use the bathroom without assistance. Therefore, assistance is offered and expected in these areas to all patients. In addition, critical-care and intensive-care rooms often must be designed to maximize free space for equipment and personnel in case of emergency care situations.

Exception 6—Toilet rooms for bariatric patients must have a unique design to address the special needs for size and weight of the patient. The provisions in ICC A117.1 do not have specific requirements for bariatric toilet and bathing facilities. The patients would need higher toilets that were located farther from the wall than standard accessible toilet configurations. Designing specifically for these patients is permitted by Section 104.11 and ICC A117.1. Section 103. However, since use of these rooms would be limited to those patients, these rooms shall not count toward the number of Accessible patient sleeping units required in Section 1108.5.3.

Exceptions 7 and 8 allow for assisted toileting and bathing in place of the bathroom configurations for Accessible units in ICC A117.1. This option is permitted for a percentage of the Accessible units for assisted living facilities (see Sections 1108.5.1.1, 1108.5.1.2), nursing homes (Section 1108.5.2.1) and rehabilitation hospitals (Section 1108.5.4). See the commentary to these sections for additional history and reasoning.

Exception 9 acknowledges the allowances in the ICC A117.1 for a toilet room and water closet compartment specifically designed for children's use. This may be appropriate in areas such as day care facilities and certain areas of elementary schools.

1110.2.1 Family or assisted-use toilet and bathing rooms. In assembly and mercantile occupancies, an accessible family or assisted-use toilet room shall be provided where an aggregate of six or more male and female water closets is required. In buildings of mixed occupancy, only those water closets required for the assembly or mercantile occupancy shall be used to determine the family or assisted-use toilet room requirement. In

===== Page 1326 =====
recreational facilities where separate-sex bathing rooms are provided, an accessible family or assisted-use bathing room shall be provided. Fixtures located within family or assisted-use toilet and bathing rooms shall be included in determining the number of fixtures provided in an occupancy.

Exception: Where each separate-sex bathing room has only one shower or bathtub fixture, a family or assisted use bathing room is not required.

The primary issue relative to family toilet/bathing facilities is that some people with disabilities require assistance to utilize them. If that attendant is of the opposite sex, a toilet or bathing facility that can accommodate both genders is required. This person and their care giver using the facilities in multistall toilet rooms for only one gender becomes a privacy concern for everyone trying to use the toilet room. Also, it is important to note that family/assisted-use bathrooms are not reserved for persons with disabilities, like a parking space. This bathroom is also an advantage to any family with small children that are the opposite sex of the parent they are with. There are situations where the parent does not feel comfortable letting the child go into the opposite-sex toilet room without them, but the child is too old to be comfortable going into the toilet room with the parent. This bathroom is also a benefit for persons who may need assistance because of a temporary disability, like a broken arm or leg. It is important to note that these provisions will typically not result in a substantial cost burden to the building owners, since the fixtures provided also count toward the minimum number required (see Section 2902.1.2, or Section 403.1.2 of SBC 701).

The family or assisted-use bathing room requirements, although beneficial to all occupants and building sizes, are only required in those structures that typically have large transient occupant loads or typically are occupied by large numbers of families, namely large assembly and mercantile. The section also identifies how mixed-occupancy buildings are to be addressed relative to the calculation. The fixtures provided in family toilet and bathing rooms count toward the number of required fixtures for the occupancy. The number of fixtures to be located in such rooms is limited, based on the premise that these rooms are secureable (see commentary, Section 1110.2.1.2). The provision for bathing facilities is primarily geared toward recreational facilities. It is only required where the designer has chosen to provide separate-sex facilities for bathing and has provided more than one tub or shower for each sex. The exception acknowledges that smaller bathing rooms such as those described can be utilized by a person with disabilities with assistance, without much hardship to a nondisabled person.

Many facilities have installed family bathrooms as part of their standard bathroom layouts prior to the code requirement, viewing them as "customer friendly." For example, a person requiring assistance can also be a small child or an elderly adult. A parent shopping or attending an event with a child of the opposite sex can utilize this facility as well as an adult who may need assistance.

Note that the requirement for family bathrooms does not exempt separate-sex bathrooms from providing accessible or ambulatory stalls. For a discussion of family bathrooms in existing buildings, see SBC 901 Section 306.7.13.

1110.2.1.1 Standard. Family or assisted-use toilet and bathing rooms shall comply with Sections 1110.2.1.2 through 1110.2.1.6.

Facilities are required to comply with the accessible technical provisions for toilet rooms in ICC A117.1 as well as the additional criteria established in the following subsections. In smaller tenant spaces, SBC 701 now requires single-occupant, separate-sex bathrooms to be labeled for both genders (see Section 2902.2.1 of this code and Section 403.2.1 of SBC 701).

1110.2.1.2 Family or assisted-use toilet rooms. Family or assisted-use toilet rooms shall include only one water closet and only one lavatory. A family or assisted-use bathing room in accordance with Section 1110.2.1.3 shall be considered to be a family or assisted-use toilet room.

Exceptions: The following additional fixtures shall be permitted in a family or assisted-use toilet room:

1. A urinal.

2. A child height water closet.

3. A child-height lavatory.

A family toilet room must include a lavatory and a water closet. The exception permits a urinal or a child's water closet or lavatory to also be installed in the family toilet room if desired. If a family bathing room (i.e., water closet, lavatory and tub/shower per Section 1110.2.1.3) is provided within a facility, it can serve as the required family toilet room.

1110.2.1.3 Family or assisted-use bathing rooms. Family or assisted-use bathing rooms shall include only one shower or bathtub fixture. Family or assisted-use bathing rooms shall also include one water closet and one lavatory. Where storage facilities are provided for separate-sex bathing

===== Page 1327 =====
rooms, accessible storage facilities shall be provided for family or assisted-use bathing rooms.

A family bathing facility is required to have one shower or tub, one water closet and one lavatory. The shower can be a transfer type, a roll-in type or a combination of the two. Accessible storage facilities, such as lockers, are also required if storage facilities are provided in the separate-sex bathing facilities. A family bathing room can also serve a dual purpose (bathing and toilet) as the required family toilet room (see commentary, Section 1110.2.1.2).

1110.2.1.4 Location. Family or assisted-use toilet and bathing rooms shall be located on an accessible route. Family or assisted-use toilet rooms shall be located not more than one story above or below separate-sex toilet rooms. The accessible route from any separate-sex toilet room to a family or assisted-use toilet room shall not exceed 150 m.

A one-story, 15,000 mm limitation for access to customer toilet facilities is currently in Section 2902.3.3 (which is duplicated from Section 403.3.3 of SBC 701). The distance to the customer toilet facilities is measured from the main entrance of a store or space to the toilet facility. The distance in this section is measured from the separate-sex facility to the family facility. The general travel distance requirement, in combination with this section, could result in a total travel distance for a family toilet room of two stories or 300 m maximum. The travel distance limitation is why there is more than one family bathroom in large facilities. An accessible route is required to provide access to the family facilities. Signage is required at both the separate-sex and family facilities in accordance with Sections 1112.1 and 1112.3.

1110.2.1.5 Prohibited location. In passenger transportation facilities and airports, the accessible route from separate-sex toilet rooms to a family or assisted-use toilet room shall not pass through security checkpoints.

Security checkpoints in airports and similar facilities represent a potential delay, which may cause missed flights or connections. Because of security concerns, more and more facilities are adding security checkpoints. For example, many large sports facilities and government buildings have checkpoints where the public moves into certain portions of the facilities. While not required, due to the delay in moving through a security system, a designer might want to follow this same guidance for location of the family bathrooms in other types of facilities.
1110.2.1.6 Privacy. Doors to family or assisted-use toilet and bathing rooms shall be secure from within the room and be provided with an “occupied” indicator.

Since privacy while utilizing bathing and toilet facilities is an issue, the door to the facility must be secure from the inside and that locking device should include an “occupied” indicator on the outside of the door. The securing mechanism must meet the operable parts requirements, including being within reach ranges and not require any tight pinching, grasping or sharp turning of the wrist to operate.

While it is not prohibited to lock bathrooms, this bathroom should be as easily accessed as the separate men's and women's bathrooms. A person who needed this facility should not have to find someone with a key for the family bathroom if the men's and women's bathrooms are readily available. This bathroom does count towards the required fixture count (see Section 2902.1.2) and as such must be available.

1110.2.2 Water closets designed for assisted toileting. Water closets designed for assisted toileting shall comply with Sections 1110.2.2.1 through 1110.2.2.6.

In Institutional occupancies, such as assisted living and nursing homes, many care recipients require assistance in toileting activities (transferring on and off the toilet, support while sitting down or standing up, clothing management, etc.). In addition, many care recipients living in care settings don't have the range of movement or upper-body strength to use the standard grab bar arrangement. ICC A117.1 requirements can actually make it more difficult to assist care recipients as proper space is not provided for staff to provide assistance from the side. The requirements in this section recognize the specific needs of caregivers and older adults in care settings and provide an equivalent facilitation to ICC A117.1.

Dr. Margaret Calkins, in conjunction with the Mayer-Rothschild Foundation, completed research on older adults in care settings and how best to support them and caregivers in the toileting process. This research studied older adults toileting independently, as well as those needing assistance from one or two caregivers and requiring mechanical lift assistance. The recommendations from this research were used to develop this set of alternative criteria to help older adults use the toilet in a safer and more supportive manner.

An example of the requirements for assisted toileting is provided in Commentary Figure 1110.2.2.

===== Page 1328 =====
1110.2.2.1 Location. The centerline of the water closet shall be not less than 600 mm and not greater than 650 mm from one side of the required clearance.

ICC A117.1 requires toilets to be located with the centerline of the water closet to be placed 450 mm from the side wall. It also requires a wall next to the water closet for mounting a grab bar. Often, a care recipient will need assistance from two caregivers (one on each side) or need assistance on one side of their body, but that side happens to be against the wall and that space is not wide enough for a staff person to get themselves into. This can cause staff injuries or lead to care recipient falls when a care recipient is not properly supported. By pulling the water closet further away from the wall, it allows space for a caregiver to come alongside the toilet and lift safely.

This section does not require a wall alongside the water closet at all. It states that the centerline of the water closet must be 600 mm to 650 mm from one side of the required clearance. This means that a water closet could be in the middle of a room, if so desired. It simply denotes where the measurement of the clearance begins. This would also mean that a wall or other obstacle cannot be located closer than 600 mm from the centerline of the water closet on one side.

1110.2.2.2 Clearance. Clearance around the water closet shall comply with Sections 1110.2.2.2.1 through 1110.2.2.2.3.

Clearance around the water closet is important to allow a person with a mobility device to maneuver and for staff assistance.

1110.2.2.2.1 Clearance width. Clearance around a water closet shall be not less than 1650 mm in width, measured perpendicularly from the side of the clearance that is not less than 600 mm and not greater than 650 mm from the water closet centerline.

As noted in the commentary for Section 1110.2.2.1, space is needed on both sides of the water closet to allow for staff to be on either or both sides to assist the care recipient in standing, sitting or transferring. The 1650 mm clearance is offset from the centerline of the water closet to provide an "open side" and a "narrow side." The wide side still allows enough clear space for a wheelchair user to pull up alongside the water closet and execute a side slide transfer if they are able to do so.

1110.2.2.2.2 Clearance depth. Clearance around the water closet shall be not less than 1950 mm in depth, measured perpendicularly from the rear wall.

The added depth in front of the water closet allows space for a mobility device such as a wheelchair or walker to be pulled in front of the water closet, or to allow space for lift access. Many care recipients who use wheelchairs can still bear weight on one or both legs for short periods of time. Many transfer to the water closet by pulling up to the front, standing up, turning around and then sitting down. More space in front of the water closet allows this to occur.

1110.2.2.2.3 Clearance overlap. The required clearance around the water closet shall permit overlaps per ICC A117.1, Section 604.3.3

The water closet clearance can overlap elements of the accessible route (path of travel, door clearance), including the turning space required in the toilet room.

Items that can overlap the clear floor space of the water closet without blocking access to the water closet include the swing-up grab bars. Items that cannot overlap the clear floor space for the water closet include counters or the accessible lavatory. The spaces at the lavatory where the person who uses a wheelchair would sit to use those fixtures may overlap the clear floor space at the water closet. The required clear floor space around the water closet is permitted to overlap the clearances in front or the floor area of the roll-in shower provided that floor slopes do not exceed 1:48 in the area for the required clearance.

1110.2.2.3 Height. The height of the water closet seats shall comply with ICC A117.1, Section 604.4.

The height of the seat of the water closet in ICC A117.1 is 425 mm to 475 mm. A standard water closet seat height is 350 mm to 450 mm. A higher seat height helps persons with difficulty standing and sitting.

1110.2.2.4 Swing-up grab bars. Swing-up grab bars shall comply with ICC A117.1, Sections 609.2 and 609.8. Swing-up grab bars shall be provided on both sides of the water closet and shall comply with all of the following:

1 The centerline of the grab bar shall be not less than 350 mm and not greater than 400 mm from the centerline of the water closet.

2 The length of the grab bar is not less than 900 mm in length, measured from the rear wall to the end of the grab bar.

3 The top of the grab bar in the down position is not less than 750 mm and not greater than 850 mm above the floor.

===== Page 1329 =====
The Mayer-Rothschild research demonstrated that swing-up grab bars are most usable for the majority of older adults. Having bars on both sides of the toilet is useful for leverage and balance when sitting and standing, as well as supporting turning in place when standing to transfer from a wheelchair or walker. The length of the grab bar must project past the front of the toilet for maximum usability.

The ability to swing the bars up and out of the way is important for caregiver assistance on one or both sides or for lift access.

Where possible, the height of the user should be considered when locating the height of the swing-up bars and adjusted as needed. Shorter users do better with the bars in the lower end of the height range.

1110.2.2.5 Flush controls. Flush controls shall comply with ICC A117.1, Section 604.6.

Flush controls must be accessible from the "open side" of the clearance at the water closet. The controls can be hand operated or automatic. Hand-operated controls must meet the standard operable parts requirements for graspability and maximum force.

1110.2.2.6 Dispensers. Toilet paper dispensers shall be mounted on at least one of the swing-up grab bars and the outlet of the dispenser shall be located not less than 600 mm and not greater than 900 mm from the rear wall.

* Locating the toilet paper dispenser on the swing-up grab bar ensures that it will be within reach of the user. Most grab bar manufacturers make clip-on or built-in dispensers.

1110.2.3 Standard roll-in-type shower compartment designed for assisted bathing. Standard roll-in-type shower compartments designed for assisted bathing shall comply with Sections 1110.2.3.1 through 1110.2.3.9.

* ICC A117.1 accessible roll-in showers work well for most wheelchair users who can transfer and shower independently. However, for older adults and those in care settings the requirements can make use of the showers more difficult. In nursing homes and assisted living facilities many residents are assisted in their bathing activities, to various extents, as they may not be able to safely manage this completely on their own. In newer care models, every sleeping room has a private bathroom with shower which allows for greater privacy and dignity for the care recipient as well as less anxiety about going to an unfamiliar space for bathing. The requirements in this section recognize the specific needs of caregivers and older adults in care settings and provide equivalent facilitation to ICC A117.1.

Examples of the requirements for assisted bathing is provided in Commentary Figures
Figure 1110.2.3(1), Figure 1110.2.3(2) and Figure 1110.2.3(3).
1110.2.3.1 Size. Standard roll-in-type shower compartments shall have a clear inside dimension of not less than 1500 mm in width and 750 mm in depth, measured at the center point of opposing sides. An entry not less than 1500 mm in width shall be provided.

This section recognizes the minimum size shower area that is required for an accessible roll-in shower. The 1500 mm by 750 mm minimum dimensions are consistent with ICC A117.1 for accessible roll-in showers.

Sometimes, larger roll-in showers and more open shower configurations work better for older adults and caregivers. Larger showers also allow for bathing of care recipients who must be bathed in a semi- or fully reclined position. These care recipients simply cannot fit in a standard shower stall. It is not the intent of these provisions to require three walls, but instead to have a minimum size for the shower base. Some shower designs use only two walls, or the entire bathroom is designed as a "European shower"—a wet room with the shower head located in the corner of the room.

1110.2.3.2 Clearance. A clearance of not less than 1500 mm in length adjacent to the 1500 mm width of the open face of the shower compartment, and not less than 750 mm in depth, shall be provided.

Exceptions:

1. A lavatory complying with ICC A117.1, Section 606 shall be permitted at one end of the clearance.

2. Where the shower compartment exceeds minimum sizes, the clear floor space shall be placed adjacent to the grab bars and not less than 750 mm from the back wall.

This section recognizes the minimum clearances needed to access this shower. A clear space of 750 mm by 1500 mm must be provided to access the shower to allow for a possible transfer for the care recipients to a bathing seat in the shower. Per Exception 1, a lavatory with knee clearance is permitted to encroach into this clearance per ICC A117.1 Section 606 [see Commentary Figure 1110.2.3(1)]. The clear floor space on the "open side" of the water closet, as described in the commentary to Section 1110.2.2.2.1, may double as this shower access space, or if the water closet is located immediately adjacent to the shower area, the shower access space would be provided in front of the water closet [see Commentary Figure 1110.2.3(2) and Figure 1110.2.3(3)].

===== Page 1330 =====
1110.2.3.3 Grab bars. Grab bars shall comply with ICC A117.1, Section 609 and shall be provided in accordance with Sections 1110.2.3.3.1 and 1110.2.3.3.2. In standard roll-in-type shower compartments, grab bars shall be provided on three walls. Where multiple grab bars are used, required horizontal grab bars shall be installed at the same height above the floor. Grab bars can be separate bars or one continuous bar.

The ICC A117.1 reference to Section 609 is for the cross section, spacing, height, surface hazards, fittings, installation and structural strength for grab bars. The configuration with three walls is consistent with a minimum size accessible shower.

1110.2.3.3.1 Back-wall grab bar. The back-wall grab bar shall extend the length of the back wall and extend within 150 mm maximum from the two adjacent sidewalls.

Exception: The back-wall grab bar shall not be required to exceed 1200 mm in length. The rear grab bar shall be located with one end within 150 mm maximum of a sidewall with a grab bar complying with Section 1110.2.3.3.2.

The base requirement has the back-wall grab bar extending the length of the back wall. The exception recognizes that where a shower area is longer than 1500 mm it is not necessary to extend the back-wall grab bar for the entire length of the wall. The back-wall and sidewall grab bars must be located in the area of the showerhead or hand shower.

1110.2.3.3.2 Sidewall grab bars. The sidewall grab bars shall extend the length of the wall and extend within 150 mm of the adjacent back wall.

Exceptions:

1. The sidewall grab bar shall not be required to exceed 750 mm in length. The side grab bar shall be located with one end within 150 mm of the back wall with a grab bar complying with Section 1110.2.3.3.1.

2. Where the sidewalls are located 1800 mm or greater apart, a grab bar is not required on one of the sidewalls.

The base requirement has the sidewall grab bar extending the length of the side wall. Exception 1 establishes a grab bar length that need not be exceeded where showers exceed minimum size. Exception 2 recognizes that if a shower area is configured where the side walls are greater than 1800 mm apart, a sidewall grab bar on the wall furthest from the shower head or hand shower may not be useful as it is too far away from the shower user and not needed for transfer in and out of the compartment.

1110.2.3.4 Seats. Wall-mounted folding seats shall not be installed.

Many older adults have difficulty transferring to and from a built-in shower bench due to limited mobility and upper arm strength. The use of a mobile shower bench or chair that has grab bars or arms attached for added assistance and security is preferred. Many care recipients are fearful of falls and wall mounted seats do not always feel very secure to them, which makes them not willing to use them. Further, if a caregiver is assisting the care recipient in bathing, the fixed location of the seat makes it very difficult to reach and clean all parts of the recipient. A mobile chair or bench allows the care recipient to be repositioned as needed. Where fixed seats are installed in showers but not used, they take up space and are often left in the up position, which can expose sharper parts of the mechanism and cause injury to care recipients or staff.

1110.2.3.5 Controls and hand showers. In standard roll-in-type showers, the controls and hand shower shall be located not less than 950 mm and not greater than 1200 mm above the shower floor. Controls shall be located to facilitate caregiver access.

When caregivers are assisting residents with bathing, the ICC A117.1 requirements for location of controls makes it very difficult to adjust water temperature and turn water flow on and off without the caregiver getting wet. By allowing flexibility in where the shower controls are located, this allows for better placement for use by both independent users who may use a mobile chair, or for caregivers. When building user input is not possible during design, a suggested location for the controls and hand shower would be on the long, or back wall of the roll-in shower, located 750 mm minimum from one of the side walls. A means of shutting off the water in the showerhead, or diverting water flow, without moving the temperature control handle should be provided.

In addition, attention should be paid to the direction of the water spray to minimize water spray outside the shower area. If a stationary shower head is provided in addition to the hand shower, it should be located on the side wall to minimize water outside the shower area. A shower curtain can assist with water containment but is not required. When caregivers are assisting with bathing, a curtain would most likely be open to allow access to the care recipient.

1110.2.3.6 Hand showers. Hand showers shall comply with ICC A117.1, Section 608.5.

===== Page 1331 =====
A means of shutting off the water in the showerhead, or diverting water flow, without moving the temperature control handle should be provided. This helps a caregiver wash the care recipient without water flowing, and then turn the water flow back on with some assurance the temperature will be at the desired level, minimizing shocking the care recipient with too cold or too hot water. This is consistent with SBC 701 Section 412.3.

1110.2.3.7 Thresholds. Thresholds shall comply with ICC A117.1, Section 608.6.

Roll-in shower thresholds should be minimized as much as possible to allow for mobile shower benches and chairs to be moved in and out of the shower easily. A threshold with a 12.5 mm maximum height will help reduce the amount of water that will reach the bathroom floor while still allowing the front wheels of wheelchairs or bathing chair to easily move into the shower stall.

1110.2.3.8 Shower enclosures. Shower compartment enclosures for shower compartments shall comply with ICC A117.1, Section 608.7.

Enclosures must be mounted in a manner that allows the user full accessibility without defeating any of the design features required by ICC A117.1. Curtains on a standard rod would typically not block a transfer; however, shower doors would most likely be an obstruction. Tracks on the shower threshold may prevent access into the shower stall. Even in a transfer situation, the wheelchair user may need to move the small front wheels of the chair into the stall to make the transfer.

1110.2.3.9 Water temperature. Water temperature shall comply with ICC A117.1, Section 608.8.

Showers shall deliver water that is  \( 50^{\circ} \) C maximum. The temperature limitation for the water is to prevent accidental scalding. Options for controlling the temperature of the water at the shower are a balanced pressure, thermostatic or combination balanced pressure/thermostatic valve. This is consistent with SBC 701 Section 412.3.

1110.2.4 Water closet compartment. Where water closet compartments are provided in a toilet room or bathing room, at least 5 percent of the total number of compartments shall be wheelchair accessible. Where the combined total water closet compartments and urinals provided in a toilet room or bathing room is six or more, at least 5 percent of the total number of compartments shall be ambulatory accessible, provided in addition to the wheelchair-accessible compartment.

There are different configurations of water closet compartments that facilitate different degrees of physical disability. The provisions of ICC A117.1 establish the configuration and dimensional requirements for various types of water closet compartments. A wheelchair-accessible compartment is one in which sufficient space is provided for the wheelchair to enter completely the water closet compartment [see Commentary Figures 1110.2.4(2) and 1110.2.4(3)]. The wheelchair user then transfers from the wheelchair to the water closet in order to utilize the fixture. It is important that the required clear floor space be maintained. The layouts for compartments did not intend for a lavatory to be provided within the minimum-sized compartment. If a lavatory is located within a compartment, it must meet the same provisions as a single-occupant toilet room.

An ambulatory-accessible compartment is intended to facilitate use by a person with a mobility impairment that necessitates the use of a walking aid, such as a cane or walker [see Commentary Figure 1110.2.4(1)]. An ambulatory-accessible water closet compartment is not intended to be utilized by a person in a wheelchair. The 900 mm width is intended to allow standing persons to support themselves utilizing the grab bars on both sides. A wider compartment would not allow adequate bearing. Since these provisions are intended to address, within reason, the needs of both ranges of mobility impairment, this section requires a wheelchair-accessible compartment in all cases. In larger toilet rooms (i.e., those with a total of six or more water closet compartments and urinals), one ambulatory-accessible compartment is required in addition to the wheelchair-accessible compartment. In very large facilities with more than 20 toilet compartments in a single toilet room, an additional accessible and ambulatory water closet may be required to meet the 5-percent requirements.

This section is not intended to increase the required number of fixtures beyond that required by SBC 701. For example, if a toilet room contains 10 water closets, eight water closet compartments may be of conventional design, one water closet compartment must be wheelchair accessible and one must be ambulatory accessible.

1110.2.5 Lavatories. Where lavatories are provided, at least 5 percent, but not less than one, shall be accessible. Where an accessible lavatory is located within the accessible water closet compartment at least one additional accessible lavatory shall be provided in the multi-compartment toilet room outside the water closet compartment. Where the total lavatories provided in a toilet room

===== Page 1332 =====
or bathing facility is six or more, at least one lavatory with enhanced reach ranges shall be provided.

A lavatory is a type of sink for which the primary purpose is hand washing. This section provides scoping requirements for lavatories located in spaces not specifically addressed or exempted by Section 1110.2. If a lavatory is provided in toilet and bathing rooms specifically exempted by Section 1110.2, it is not required to be accessible. Lavatories that are part of an employee workstation are exempted under Section 1103.2.2. An example of a lavatory that was part of an employee's work area would be the lavatories found in the exam rooms. The lavatories are there for the nurses and doctors to wash their hands before examining a patient. Where lavatories are provided in other areas, a minimum of 5 percent, but not less than one, is required to be accessible via a front approach with appropriate knee and toe clearances.

A designer can choose to locate an accessible lavatory actually within the accessible toilet stall for customer convenience. If this is the case, that cannot be the only accessible lavatory within the toilet room. An additional accessible lavatory must be provided outside of the accessible stall. In large facilities, where the designer has located six or more lavatories within one toilet facility (similar to the ambulatory stall), one of the lavatories must also be provided with enhanced reach range for the faucet controls in accordance with Section 606.5 of ICC A117.1. This would require the faucets to be located on the side of the lavatory or provide access to the side of one of the lavatories, or to have automatic controls. This is to address the needs of persons who may have a limited reach over the lavatory where they may have difficulty reaching the controls. The lavatory with enhanced reach range could be the same lavatory as the accessible lavatory, or it could be another lavatory.

There are allowances in ICC A117.1 for lavatories specifically designed for children's use. This may be appropriate in areas such as day care facilities and certain areas of elementary schools.

1110.3 Sinks. Where sinks are provided, at least 5 percent but not less than one provided in accessible spaces shall be accessible.

Exception: Mop or service sinks are not required to be accessible.

A sink may have numerous functions, unlike a lavatory, which is primarily provided for hand washing. Sinks in kitchens, kitchenettes and classrooms are examples that may have scoping and accessibility requirements different than those for lavatories. Where sinks are provided, a minimum of 5 percent, but not fewer than one, is required to be accessible via a front approach with knee and toe clearances. There is a specific exception here for mop or service-type sinks. Service sinks include a wide variety of specialized sinks manufactured for multiple or specific functions. Service sinks are typically sized to be very deep and positioned for their function, which often renders them incapable of being accessible. Also, where a sink is part of an individual workstation, that sink is not required to be accessible in accordance with Section 1103.2.2.

A forward approach to sinks is not always required (see commentary, Section 1110.4).

There are allowances in ICC A117.1 for sinks specifically designed for children's use. This may be appropriate in areas such as day care facilities and certain areas of elementary schools.

1110.4 Kitchens and kitchenettes. Where kitchens and kitchenettes are provided in accessible spaces or rooms, they shall be accessible.

Kitchens, kitchenettes and wet bars in spaces such as community rooms or break rooms must be accessible. Kitchens, kitchenettes and wet bars within Accessible, Type A and Type B units shall comply with ICC A117.1, Chapter 10 (see exception, Section 1110.1). An accessible kitchen would include clear floor spaces at all appliances, a sink with a front approach and a work surface with a front approach (see Section 804 of ICC A117.1 for specific details). Kitchenettes (where a cooktop or conventional range is not provided) allow a side approach to the sink (Section 606 of ICC A117.1) and do not require an accessible work surface. A common mistake is to forget that the sink must be set at a maximum height of 850 mm to allow for reach to the faucets (see Commentary Figure 1110.4).

Commercial kitchens are considered employee work areas. See the commentaries to Sections 1103.2.2 and 1104.3.1. Kitchenettes that are part of an employee break room are specifically excluded in the definition of "Employee work area" (see Chapter 2) and must be accessible.

1110.5 Drinking fountains. Where drinking fountains are provided on an exterior site, on a floor or within a secured area, the drinking fountains shall be provided in accordance with Sections 1110.5.1 and 1110.5.2.

This section establishes a reasonable threshold for the required number of accessible drinking fountains. It should be noted that this section does not require the installation of drinking fountains where none are required or

===== Page 1333 =====
provided. Chapter 29 (which is duplicated from Section 403 of SBC 701) contains criteria indicating the number of drinking fountains that are required based on occupancy. There are spaces that are not required to have drinking fountains. Examples are spaces with fewer than 15 occupants and spaces that serve water, such as a restaurant.

Current requirements for plumbing fixtures (see Table 2902.1 of this code and Table 403 of SBC 701) stipulate only one drinking fountain for many facilities or tenant spaces. The provisions in Section 1110.5.1 of this code and Section 410.3.1 of SBC 701 stipulate a minimum of two drinking fountains for these facilities and spaces in order to meet the high/low criteria. Additionally, the plumbing requirements would allow for 50 percent of the drinking fountains to be substituted with water dispensers (see Section 410.4 of SBC 701). While the provisions in Sections 1110.5.1 of this code and 1110.5.2 and Section 410.3.1 of SBC 701 would not prohibit the substitution, the requirement for two drinking fountains would effectively negate this substitution unless there were at least three drinking fountains required for a floor. SBC 701 has defined “Drinking fountain,” “Water cooler” and “Water dispenser” in an effort to clarify the differences between drinking fountains (including water coolers) and stand-alone water dispensers. A water dispenser cannot be considered as an alternative to either the high or low drinking fountain. However, water dispensers that are permanently installed would have to comply with Section 1110.15 for operable parts.

SBC 701 includes provisions for travel distance to a drinking fountain (see Section 403.5 of SBC 701), which are 152 m and one-story maximum travel. In malls, the maximum travel is reduced to 91 m.

1110.5.1 Minimum number. No fewer than two drinking fountains shall be provided. One drinking fountain shall comply with the requirements for people who use a wheelchair and one drinking fountain shall comply with the requirements for standing persons.

Exceptions:

1. A single drinking fountain with two separate spouts that complies with the requirements for people who use a wheelchair and standing persons shall be permitted to be substituted for two separate drinking fountains.

2. Where drinking fountains are primarily for children’s use, drinking fountains for people using wheelchairs shall be permitted to comply with the children’s provisions in ICC A117.1 and drinking fountains for standing children shall be permitted to provide the spout at 760 mm minimum above the floor.

Where a single drinking fountain is provided, this section mandates a minimum of two fixtures be provided: one for persons seated in a wheelchair (low) and one for standing persons (high). The high and low drinking fountains that serve a facility need not be provided at the same location in the facility. If the high and low drinking fountains are remotely located, signage is required to indicate the location of the other fountains (see Section 1112.3). Technical criteria for both high and low fountains are located in Section 602 of ICC A117.1 (see Commentary Figure 1110.5.1). The drinking fountains must be located so that they are not protruding objects (see Section 1003.3). If a water bottle filler is provided, it must meet operable parts requirements (see Section 1110.15).

Exception 1 allows for a single drinking fountain to meet the requirements for both high and low heights by providing two spouts at one bowl; however, at this time there are only a few drinking fountains on the market that can meet this criterion. See the commentary to Section 1110.5.

Exception 2 allows for both the high and low drinking fountains to be designed for children. There are technical criteria in A117.1 for wheelchair-accessible drinking fountains specifically designed for children who are age 12 and younger. This may be appropriate for facilities such as day care facilities and certain areas of elementary schools.

1110.5.2 More than the minimum number. Where more than the minimum number of drinking fountains specified in Section 1110.5.1 is provided, 50 percent of the total number of drinking fountains provided shall comply with the requirements for persons who use a wheelchair and 50 percent of the total number of drinking fountains provided shall comply with the requirements for standing persons.

Exceptions:

1. Where 50 percent of the drinking fountains yields a fraction, 50 percent shall be permitted to be rounded up or down, provided that the total number of drinking fountains complying with this section equals 100 percent of the drinking fountains.

2. Where drinking fountains are primarily for children’s use, drinking fountains for people using wheelchairs shall be

===== Page 1334 =====
permitted to comply with the children's provisions in ICC A117.1 and drinking fountains for standing children shall be permitted to provide the spout at 760 mm minimum above the floor.

When an even number of drinking fountains is provided, half must accommodate persons seated in wheelchairs (low) and half must accommodate standing persons (high). Exception 1 addresses when an odd number of drinking fountains is provided.

An example:

• Two drinking fountains are required by Section 1110.5.1 and Section 410.2 of SBC 701.

• Seven drinking fountains are provided.

• Fifty percent of seven is three and one-half.

• Rounding up yields four; rounding down yields three.

Therefore, there are two choices:

• Provide four low and three high fountains: or

• Provide three low and four high fountains.

• Both choices comply since the complying fixtures total 100 percent.

This logic applies whenever an odd number of three or more drinking fountains is provided, regardless of the total quantity. This is based on the number provided—not the number required. In accordance with Section 410.3 of SBC 701, a designer/owner could switch out some of the required drinking fountains for bottled water dispensers (see commentary to Section 1110.5).

Exception 2 is consistent with the same exception in Section 1110.5.2, allowing for both high and low drinking fountains to be designed for children. There are technical criteria in ICC A117.1 for wheelchair accessible drinking fountains specifically designed for children who are age 12 and younger. This may be appropriate for day care facilities and certain areas of elementary schools.

1110.6 1110.6 Bottle-filling stations. Where bottle-filling stations are provided, they shall be accessible.

Exception: Bottle-filling stations over drinking fountains for standing persons are not required to be accessible, provided that bottle-filling stations are also located over the drinking fountains for persons using wheelchairs.

In the interest of reducing the use of disposable bottles for water, many schools are providing bottle-filling stations. Due to security limitations, bottle-filling stations are also being
provided in airports. All operable parts intended for use by occupants must be accessible.

The exception is in recognition that the requirements for standing drinking fountains potentially will not allow for compliant reach over an obstruction. When the bottle-filling stations are provided over the wheelchair drinking fountains, having them also over the standing drinking fountains would be providing redundant facilities.

1110.7 Saunas and steam rooms. Where provided, saunas and steam rooms shall be accessible.

Exception: Where saunas or steam rooms are clustered at a single location, at least 5 percent of the saunas and steam rooms, but not less than one, of each type in each cluster shall be accessible.

Since 2009, ICC A117.1 has included technical requirements for saunas and steam rooms. The scoping in SBC 201 is consistent with bathrooms and coordinates with the 2010 ADA Standard. What constitutes a "cluster" is subjective; however, typically the rooms would have to have entrances immediately adjacent to or across the hall from one another to be considered "clustered."

The requirements in the standard provide for entering the room, closing the door and then transferring to the bench in the room. Removing the wheelchair from the space is not addressed, so perhaps a special chair might be utilized. Section 914 of SBC 501 addresses safety requirements for sauna rooms.

1110.8 Elevators. Passenger elevators on an accessible route shall be accessible and comply with Chapter 30.

This section requires all passenger elevators on an accessible route to be accessible. The reference to Chapter 30 requires all passenger elevators to conform to general elevator safety standards as well as accessibility standards. This section is not intended to prohibit service elevators, Limited Use Limited Access (LULA) elevators, private residence elevators or platform lifts (as permitted by Section 1110.9). Service, LULA and private residence elevators are recognized as types of passenger lifts by ASME A17.1/CSA B44.

Elevators are defined in ASME A17.1 as “a hoisting and lowering mechanism, equipped with a car, that moves within guides and serves two or more landings …” The limitations of use for the different types of elevators are controlled by the standard.

ASME limits the occupants in “freight elevators” to just the operator and the people needed to load and unload the freight. Also “construction elevators” are limited to

===== Page 1335 =====
construction purposes only. Only passenger-type elevators can serve as part of an accessible route. Therefore, freight and construction types of elevators are not required to be accessible.

The term “service elevator” is not defined in ASME A17.1. This is a slang term used by building owners to separate the “back of the house” passenger elevator used by staff (and typically designed to accommodate a heavier load) from the passenger elevators used by the general public for circulation. As part of an accessible route to employee work areas, a service elevator is required to be accessible.

LULA elevators have a maximum vertical travel distance of 7.5 m. Private residence elevators are limited to within or serving individual dwelling units.

It should also be noted that, unlike requirements for plumbing fixtures, this section does not establish that a certain number of passenger elevators are required to be accessible while other passenger elevators may be of a design that is not fully accessible. All passenger elevators that are on an accessible route are required to be accessible. If a bank of passenger elevators is provided as part of an accessible route, all elevators in that bank must be accessible. See SBC 901 Section 306.7.7 for existing elevators being altered.

The reference to an accessible route (see Sections 1104.3, 1104.4 and 1110.8) is important because some areas in certain buildings may not be required to be accessible (see Sections 1103.2 and 1104.4). For example, since an elevator penthouse is not required to be accessible (see Section 1103.2.9), the passenger elevator is not required to serve that level. Keep in mind that the penthouse that contains elevator equipment must be accessed by a stairway (see Section 1011.12.1). In addition, certain types of elevators (e.g., freight elevators) may not be part of an accessible route.

Note that there are additional requirements for elevators depending on the building height:

In buildings four stories and higher, at least one elevator must be sized in order to accommodate stretchers (see Section 3002.4).

In buildings five stories and higher, an elevator must be available for serving as part of an accessible means of egress (see Section 1009.2.1).

• Buildings 36 m or taller shall have two fire service access elevators, both sized to fit a stretcher (see Sections 403 and 3007).
• Occupant evacuation elevators are also an option (see Section 3008).

Note that fire service access elevators and occupant evacuation elevators can also serve as elevators that are part of an accessible means of egress. Two-way communication must be provided in elevator lobbies in sprinkled buildings (see Section 1009.8).

1110.9 Lifts. Platform (wheelchair) lifts are permitted to be a part of a required accessible route in new construction where indicated in Items 1 through 10. Platform (wheelchair) lifts shall be installed in accordance with ASME A18.1.

1 An accessible route to a performing area and speaker platforms.

2 An accessible route to wheelchair spaces required to comply with the wheelchair space dispersion requirements of Sections 1109.2.2 through 1109.2.6.

3 An accessible route to spaces that are not open to the general public with an occupant load of not more than five.

4 An accessible route within an individual dwelling unit or sleeping unit required to be an Accessible unit, Type A unit or Type B unit.

5 An accessible route to jury boxes and witness stands; raised courtroom stations including judges' benches, clerks' stations, bailiffs' stations, deputy clerks' stations and court reporters' stations; and to depressed areas such as the well of the court.

6 An accessible route to load and unload areas serving amusement rides.

7 An accessible route to play components or soft contained play structures.

8 An accessible route to team or player seating areas serving areas of sport activity.

9 An accessible route instead of gangways serving recreational boating facilities and fishing piers and platforms.

10 An accessible route where existing exterior site constraints make use of a ramp or elevator infeasible.

This section indicates that platform (wheelchair) lifts are only permitted to be part of a required accessible route in new construction in limited situations. If a platform lift is permitted as part of the accessible route into a space, it can also serve as part of the accessible route used for means of egress out of the space (with the exception of Item 10) if it has standby power (see Section 1007.5). There are concerns about the potential for a large number of people needing to exit the building under the allowances for Item 10;

===== Page 1336 =====
therefore, an accessible means of egress must be via another route. Platform lifts may be used more extensively in existing construction (see SBC 901 Section 306.7.8). This is in recognition that circumstances in existing buildings may make it impractical to accomplish accessibility by use of an elevator, in which case a platform lift is a reasonable alternative. Accessible means of egress is not required in existing buildings undergoing alterations (see SBC 901 306.7.2); therefore, a platform lift as part of the accessible means of egress in these situations is not an issue.

A previous edition of the technical standard (i.e., ASME A17.1-1996) required key operation to platform lifts, which unnecessarily inhibited independent access by persons with physical disabilities. The requirements for platform lifts have been removed from the elevator standard and now have their own standard, ASME A18.1, Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts. This newer standard allows push-button operation of platform lifts, thus making independent access much easier.

The listed items indicate where a platform lift can be utilized as part of a required accessible route in new construction. Items 1 and 2 allow platform lifts to be utilized for access to performing (e.g., stages, orchestra pits) and wheelchair space locations used to view an event.

Item 3 specifies that a platform lift may be used to provide access to a non-public area with five or less occupants, such as a projection booth. Item 4 allows for a platform lift within an individual dwelling or sleeping unit.

Item 5 permits platform lifts to provide access to the raised or lowered areas typically found in courtroom settings. This is consistent with Section 1109.4.1.4.

Item 6 allows platform lifts for access to loading and unloading areas serving amusement rides. It does not attempt to address access to any other element of a ride. There are provisions for amusement rides in Section 1111.4.8 and Chapter 10 of the 2017 ICC A117.1.

Item 7 identifies children's play spaces, the entry to which may be raised or depressed, as an appropriate place for a platform lift. Such spaces are often associated with restaurants, shopping malls and pre-schools. There are provisions for children's play areas in Chapter 10 of the 2017 ICC A117.1.

Item 8 acknowledges that team or player seating may be a small, depressed area (i.e., dugout) capable of being efficiently served by a platform lift.

Item 9 allows for a platform lift to serve as part of the accessible route to recreational boating and fishing piers required to be on an accessible route per Sections 1111.4.9 and 1111.4.11.

Item 10 recognizes that existing site constraints may make installation of a ramp or elevator infeasible. An example would be the situation of dealing with existing public sidewalks, easements and public ways in downtown urban areas. This situation would be most common in hilly areas where the street and sidewalk follows grade and the building's floor is level, resulting in steps up or down at entrances. It should be noted that in this situation, while a platform lift can be used for the accessible route into a space, it cannot be used as one of the required accessible means of egress (see Section 1009.5).

Note that a platform lift that was not part of the required accessible route could be used to facilitate access to any space. The governing factor in those situations would be the limitations of the product itself for capacity and travel distance. Item 4 permits platform lifts to be utilized within individual dwelling or sleeping units as part of a required accessible route. Single-family homes are not required to be accessible. However, persons with mobility impairments may choose to install stairway chairlifts in their private homes. Section 1011.2, Exception 3, specifies a minimum stairway width for platform lifts or chair lifts provided within dwelling units.

A platform lift is an electrically operated, mechanical device designed to transport a person who cannot use stairs over a short vertical distance. Platform lifts must be sized to accommodate a wheelchair. Platform lifts can be used by persons who use wheelchairs or scooters and persons with limited mobility. Some platform lifts are equipped with folding seats. A fold-down seat that moves up the stairway is not a platform lift, but rather a chair lift. A stairway chair lift is not suitable for a person using a wheelchair and cannot serve as part of a required accessible route. A platform lift is most suitable for changes of elevation of one story or less where the installation of a ramp is not feasible. ASME A18.1 limits the rise of platform lifts to 4200 mm or less. [see Commentary Figure 1110.9(2)].

While new technologies are expanding current options, there are two basic types of platform lifts: vertical lifts and inclined lifts. Vertical lifts are similar to elevators in that they travel only up and down in a fixed vertical space. Platform lifts should not be confused with Limited Access Limited Use elevators or private residence elevators (see Section 1110.8). Inclined platform lifts are usually installed in conjunction with a stairway and travel along the

===== Page 1337 =====
slope of the stairway. Inclined lifts are a design consideration for long flights of stairs where a vertical platform lift is not practical, where headroom is limited or where ceilings are low.

1110.10 Storage. Where fixed or built-in storage elements such as cabinets, coat hooks, shelves, medicine cabinets, lockers, closets and drawers are provided in required accessible spaces, at least 5 percent, but not less than one of each type shall be accessible.

Fixed or built-in storage elements are common in many occupancies, including both residential and non-residential occupancies such as office buildings, recreational facilities, etc. Examples would include coat closets, storage closets, lockers, etc. The code does not require storage facilities, but when such facilities are provided, this section requires at least 5 percent, but not fewer than one, of each type to contain storage space in accordance with ICC A117.1. This could be a portion of shelving or coat rods, a number of lockers, etc. Requirements would include a wheelchair space in front of the element, operable parts (if applicable) and the shelf, box or hook within the 375 to 1200 mm reach ranges. Where lockers are located in locker rooms where people are expected to change clothes, see Section 1110.14.

Kitchens and kitchenettes required to be accessible are more specifically addressed in Section 804 of ICC A117.1. For the kitchen or kitchenette to be able to have both upper and lower cabinets at heights that keep the counter useable, storage elements are not required to meet the reach range. Other storage elements within Accessible and Type A units are specifically addressed under Chapter 11 of ICC A117.1. Type B units do not have requirements for storage elements.

Storage elements that would be part of an employee workspace, such as a lab in a doctor's office, are exempted under Section 1103.2.2.

1110.10.1 Equity. Accessible facilities and spaces shall be provided with the same storage elements as provided in the similar non-accessible facilities and spaces.

This section is really about the issue of equal access to amenities. This requirement is consistent with the requirements for family or assisted-use bathrooms to have the same lockers, hand dryers, baby-changing stations, etc., as provided in the men's and women's bathrooms. For example, hotel rooms commonly provide closets and dressers for guests. These same storage facilities must also be available in Accessible sleeping units. They cannot be eliminated as an option to providing an accessible route or turning space within the Accessible unit. For hotel rooms, ICC A117.1 has a requirement for providing equal bathroom counter space in similar Accessible and nonaccessible guestrooms.

1110.10.2 Shelving and display units. Self-service shelves and display units shall be located on an accessible route. Such shelving and display units shall not be required to comply with reach-range provisions.

This section is intended to provide sightlines to items on shelves for persons who utilize wheelchairs. Someone may be required to assist them in reaching the items, as putting all items within the 375 to 1200 mm reach range would adversely affect the space allowed for products or information.

1110.11 Detectable warnings. Passenger transit platform edges bordering a drop-off and not protected by platform screens or guards shall have a detectable warning.

Exception: Detectable warnings are not required at bus stops.

A detectable warning is a standardized feature built in or applied to walking surfaces to warn a visually impaired person of a hazard on or near his or her path of travel and which could result in injury to that person, such as a street or significant drop-off.

This section requires a detectable warning at the edges of passenger transit platforms where they border a drop-off (see Commentary Figure 1110.11). For example, loading platforms in both light- and heavy-rail transit stations where passengers await the arrival of trains are serious potential hazards to a person with a vision impairment when there is no train at the station. The presence of a detectable warning at the platform edge where it borders the drop-off would be encountered and recognized by a person with a vision impairment either through detection by a long cane or by foot contact. This is also a good safety feature for all passengers.

The exception for bus stops is established so as not to require a detectable warning at the curb between a sidewalk and the street. Detectable warnings at curbs are contradictory to the envisioned application of detectable warnings in the built environment. The curb itself is a recognizable and well-known cue to people with vision impairments to proceed with caution.

There is a great deal of controversy and general disagreement as to the benefit or advisability of detectable warning surfaces throughout the built environment. The use of such warnings at transit stations is, to date, the only well-documented use of detectable warnings, as discussed in studies such as

===== Page 1338 =====
“Tactile Warnings to Promote Safety in the Vicinity of Transit Platform Edges,” conducted by the Urban Mass Transportation Administration, and “Pathfinder Tactile Tile Demonstration Test Project,” conducted by the Metro-Dade Transit Agency. The Access Board looked into this issue as part of the development of the Public Rights-of-Way Guidelines for intersections of public sidewalks and roads. The 2010 ADA Standard dropped the requirement for detectable warnings at curb cuts. Neither the code nor ICC A117.1 requires detectable warnings at curb cuts. ICC A117.1 only addresses the technical criteria for when someone chooses to provide detectable warnings.

ICC A117.1 prescribes the type of surface that constitutes a detectable warning in Section 705. One option for the detectable warning surface that is currently considered suitable consists of raised, truncated domes with a diameter between 23 mm and 36 mm, a height of approximately 5.1 mm and center-to-center spacing of between 40 mm and 60 mm. However, there is current and ongoing research into the use and application of truncated domes as a suitable detectable warning surface for various applications, including interior and exterior locations. ICC A117.1 requires that the type of detectable warning surface utilized must be standard throughout a building, facility, site or complex of buildings. If different types of detectable warning surfaces are utilized, their usefulness is diminished. The different messages they would convey to a person with a vision impairment would not be consistent and may be confusing and easily misinterpreted.

It is anticipated that future applications of detectable warnings will be considered when additional research and documentation of their usefulness and suitability is available. One issue, among many, is the durability of a detectable warning surface in an exterior application and the potential difficulty that truncated domes may present to a person in a wheelchair, as well as to non-disabled persons who may have to negotiate the surface.

1110.12 Seating at tables, counters and work surfaces. Where seating or standing space at fixed or built-in tables, counters or work surfaces is provided in accessible spaces, at least 5 percent of the seating and standing spaces, but not less than one, shall be accessible.

Exception: Check-writing surfaces at check-out aisles not required to comply with Section 1110.13.1 are not required to be accessible.
Many occupancies, such as libraries, classrooms and other public spaces, are equipped with fixed seating, tables or both (see Commentary Figure 1110.12). The threshold of 5 percent is consistent with the requirement for accessible seating in dining areas as specified in Section 1109.2.9.1. Fixed or built-in seating that is part of an individual workstation is not required to be accessible (see Section 1103.2.2). Where required, accessible tables and work surfaces are expected to include adequate knee and toe clearances as specified in ICC A117.1. For requirements for points of sales or service that do not include a workstation, see Section 1110.13.2. For example, the check-writing station in the center of the bank lobby is considered a workstation, whereas the teller window is typically considered a service counter. The accessible check-writing station would require knee and toe clearances, while the accessible teller window would not.

Note that the requirement addresses built-in counters, tables or workstations for standing or seating. Built-in surfaces where persons are typically standing are most often installed at a height of 900 to 1200 mm. Depending on the overall configuration of the counters in the space, a portion of the counter for standing persons may need to be lowered to an accessible height of 700 to 850 mm and configured for forward approach.

The exception clarifies that a check-writing surface provided at a nonaccessible checkout aisle is not required to meet the counter and work surface requirements in ICC A117.1 (see Section 1110.13.1).

There are allowances in ICC A117.1 for work surfaces specifically designed for children's use. This may be appropriate in facilities such as day care facilities and certain areas of elementary schools, or areas frequented mostly by children, such as children's museums or the children's areas in libraries.
1110.12.1 Dispersion. Accessible fixed or built-in seating at tables, counters or work surfaces shall be distributed throughout the space or facility containing such elements and located on a level accessed by an accessible route.

An appropriate distribution of seating and tables is required and is intended to be consistent with the distribution of all such seating and tables in the facility. For example, a library may contain several separate areas in which fixed seating or tables are installed. This provision would prohibit the location of all accessible seating and tables in a single specific area of the facility. However, this should not be construed to mean that every separate area in which fixed seating or tables

===== Page 1339 =====
are provided is required to contain an accessible seat or table. For example, if there are four areas in which fixed seating or tables are located, and two such seats or tables are required by this section to be accessible, this section requires that one accessible seat or table be located in two of the four areas.

If the facility has floor levels exempted from an accessible route (see Section 1104.4), accessible work surfaces are not required to be located on the nonaccessible level.

1110.12.2 Visiting areas. Visiting areas in judicial facilities and Group I-3 shall comply with Sections 1110.12.2.1 and 1110.12.2.2.

Persons appearing in court proceedings may need to talk with their lawyer, social worker, parole officer, etc. If a prisoner is serving a sentence, they may need to talk with all these individuals, as well as have visitations from family. Typically, these visitation areas include cubicles or counters in supervised areas.

1110.12.2.1 Cubicles and counters. At least 5 percent, but not less than one of the cubicles, shall be accessible on both the visitor and detainee sides. Where counters are provided, at least one shall be accessible on both the visitor and detainee sides.

Exception: This requirement shall not apply to the detainee side of cubicles or counters at noncontact visiting areas not serving Accessible unit holding cells.

If detainee/visitor counters or cubicles are provided, at least 5 percent must be accessible. Since it is not known if the person needing the accessible counter is on the visitor side or the detainee side, at least one counter location shall be accessible on both sides. In accordance with the exception, visiting areas that do not serve accessible cells would still require 5 percent of the counters or cubicles to be accessible on the visitor's side (see Commentary Figure 1110.12.2.1). This is consistent with the exception to certain areas of jails in accordance with Section 1103.2.13.

1110.12.2.2 Partitions. Where solid partitions or security glazing separate visitors from detainees, at least one of each type of cubicle or counter partition shall be accessible.

Section 1110.12.2.1 requires 5 percent of cubicles or counters in jail visiting areas to be accessible in accordance with the built-in counter/work surface requirements. This section deals with the visiting situation where solid partitions of security glazing separate visitors from detainees. To facilitate communication, the system may include some type of handset, headphones or microphone. The system must consider in its design that either user may use a wheelchair or have difficulty bending or stooping. Any type of telephone or headphone system provided to address communication must have a volume control.

1110.13 Service facilities. Service facilities shall provide for accessible features in accordance with Sections 1110.14 through 1110.13.4.

This section introduces four subsections that address accessibility of: check-out aisles; service counters or windows; food service; and queues and waiting lines. These types of elements are broadly termed "service facilities" and are intended to permit usage by persons with physical disabilities.

1110.13.1 Check-out aisles. Where check-out aisles are provided, accessible check-out aisles shall be provided in accordance with Table 1110.13.1. Where check-out aisles serve different functions, accessible check-out aisles shall be provided in accordance with Table 1110.13.1 for each function. Where check-out aisles are dispersed throughout the building or facility, accessible check-out aisles shall also be dispersed. Traffic control devices, security devices and turnstiles located in accessible check-out aisles or lanes shall be accessible.

Exception: Where the public use area is under 465 m² not more than one accessible checkout aisle shall be required.

This section applies to sales locations configured as lanes or aisles, often designed to accommodate shopping carts typically found in supermarkets, drugstores, discount retail stores, etc. (see Commentary Figure 1110.13.1). If check-out aisles serve different functions, at least one check-out aisle that serves each function shall be accessible. If a facility offers checkout stations at a variety of locations, the accessible locations must also be dispersed. Where security devices such as turnstiles and automatically activated gates are provided, they are required to be accessible. The required number of check-out aisles for each function is set forth in Table 1110.13.1. Signage is required in accordance with Section 1112.1.

Providing a cash register at a location does not automatically create a check-out aisle. See Section 1110.13.2 for sales and service counters.

The exception allows for small retail facilities to only provide one accessible check-out counter.

1110.13.2 Sales and service counters and windows. Where counters or windows are provided for sale or distribution of goods or services, at least one of each type of counter and window provided shall be accessible. Where such counters or windows are dispersed throughout the building or

===== Page 1340 =====
facility, accessible counters or windows shall also be dispersed.

Wherever sales or service counters or windows are provided, at least one window or a portion of a counter is required to be accessible. For example, most hotel registration and check-out functions occur at a counter. This section is intended to require that the window or one portion of the counter area be accessible. Accessibility is accomplished by providing a lower counter height to accommodate a person using a wheelchair and locating that counter on an accessible route. This is not necessarily intended to require that multiple lower counter heights be provided based on the different types of services that are offered. For example, this is not intended to require two separate, lower counter heights: one for hotel registration and one for check-out. One lower counter height can be provided at which both functions are accomplished. In the above-described situation, dispersion of the accessible counters would be required if the counters themselves were dispersed in separate locations.

The accessible service window is intended to permit the customer to interact with the service representative the same way they interact with the general public. An extra piece of counter stuck on the front of the high service counter [typically 1050 to 1200 mm high] may be appropriate as a temporary fix for barrier removal but is not acceptable in new construction. ICC A117.1 permits a maximum counter height of 900 mm at a service window and counters (see commentary, Section 1110.12 and Commentary Figure 1110.13.2).

1110.13.3 Food service lines. Food service lines shall be accessible. Where self-service shelves are provided, at least 50 percent, but not less than one, of each type provided shall be accessible.

All lines that provide access to food service must meet the accessible route provisions in ICC A117.1. Where self-service shelves are utilized, such as in a cafeteria, at least half of each type must be on an accessible route and be located within reach ranges (see Commentary Figure 1110.13.3).

1110.13.4 Queue and waiting lines. Queue and waiting lines servicing accessible counters or check-out aisles shall be accessible.

If patrons must form a line for service, then the waiting line must meet the accessible route provisions of ICC A117.1. Accessible waiting lines are required at locations where accessible counters, windows or checkout aisles are provided, such as banks, ticket counters, fast-food establishments and similar facilities. A separate waiting line for persons with disabilities is not a viable alternative. This section does not require permanent designation of queue lines. However, where permanent crowd control barriers are provided, special attention must be paid to turns around such obstructions or dividers.

1110.14 Dressing, fitting and locker rooms. Where dressing rooms, fitting rooms or locker rooms are provided, at least 5 percent, but not less than one, of each type of use in each cluster provided shall be accessible.

This section establishes a reasonable minimum threshold for accessible dressing, fitting and locker rooms. This section does not require that dressing, fitting and locker rooms be provided, but when such facilities are provided, at least 5 percent of each group of rooms is required to be accessible. This section also requires an appropriate distribution of accessible facilities based on distinct and different functions of each group of facilities provided. For example, a department store may have one group of fitting rooms serving the menswear department and a separate group of fitting rooms serving the women's wear department. This section would not permit the location of all accessible fitting rooms in one department and no accessible fitting rooms in another department. This may result in a number of accessible fitting rooms greater than 5 percent of the total number of all fitting rooms in the facility. For example, if there are two dressing rooms in each of three different departments in a retail store, a total of three accessible fitting rooms would be required: one in each of the three areas. Where amenities such as coat hooks, lockers or shelves are provided in inaccessible dressing, fitting or locker rooms, they must also be provided in the accessible rooms (see Section 1110.10). In accordance with Section 803.4 of ICC A117.1, an accessible bench must be provided in all accessible dressing, fitting and locker rooms (see Commentary Figure 1110.14). While the grab bars might facilitate transfer to the bench, they are not required.

1110.15 Controls, operating mechanisms and hardware. Controls, operating mechanisms and hardware intended for operation by the occupant, including switches that control lighting and ventilation and electrical convenience outlets, in accessible spaces, along accessible routes or as parts of accessible elements shall be accessible.

Exceptions:

1. Operable parts that are intended for use only by service or maintenance personnel shall not be required to be accessible.

===== Page 1341 =====
2. Access doors or gates in barrier walls and fences protecting pools, spas and hot tubs shall be permitted to comply with Section 1010.2.3.

3. Operable parts exempted in accordance with ICC A117.1 are not required to be accessible.

This section requires that any controls intended to be utilized by the occupants of the space be accessible where such controls are located in an accessible space, along accessible routes or as part of an accessible element. For example, the switch controlling the general lighting of a room that is required to be accessible also must be accessible. This is also true for most of the electrical outlets that are located in the room. Thermostats that are intended to be adjustable by the occupants must also be accessible. Another example would be the button or switch that activates an automatic hand dryer in a toilet room. If the fixture is mounted such that the outlet for the air is at an accessible height, the purpose is defeated if the switch to activate the device is inaccessible.

Exception 1 deals with items that are not intended for use by the general occupants of the space. This would include controls such as thermostats that are intended to be adjustable only by authorized personnel. Another example would be the controls restricted to use by authorized personnel for a public address system in a meeting room.

Exception 2 addresses the operable parts on safety gates and doors serving pools, spas and hot tubs. The operable parts are required to be higher than normal to be above the reach of young children (see Section 1010.2.3).

Exception 3 provides a general reference for the exceptions in ICC A117.1. The intent is for coordination between documents over time. See ICC A117.1 Section 309 for the 10 exceptions.

1110.16 Gaming machines and gaming tables. A minimum of two percent, but not less than one, of each gaming machine type and gaming table type shall be accessible Where multiple gaming areas occur, accessible gaming machines and gaming tables shall be distributed throughout.

Gaming machines and tables are now found nationwide. Accessibility must be considered to allow access to these services/games for all people. Side approach access is not practical or comfortable for extended playing time. Front access allows integration with other players for equal play time and communication.

When gaming tables (e.g., blackjack, roulette, craps, poker) are provided, at least one of each type should be accessible. This may require one of the tables to be positioned at a height that would seat all players at the same height as the person using the wheelchair, rather than on high stools.

With gaming machines, there may be many different games and amounts within one facility. Making 2 percent of each type accessible should provide players with a variety of options. It is not intended that 2 percent of each theme be offered for the same game/amount.

The choice of which machines are made accessible is up to the building owner or designer, but they should be distributed throughout the facility.

## SECTION 1111 RECREATIONAL FACILITIES

1111.1 General. Recreational facilities shall be provided with accessible features in accordance with Sections 1111.2 through 1111.4.

Recreational and sports facilities such as tennis courts, swimming pools, baseball fields, etc., may be part of development on a site such as a school or apartment complex. Group R-2, R-3 and R-4 facilities are addressed in Sections 1111.2 through 1111.2.3 so that equitable opportunity for use by all occupants of a multiple-building site would be evaluated. All other occupancies must comply with Section 1111.3.

The provisions are intended to allow all persons to participate in the recreational activity to the best of their abilities. It is not intended to change the playing surface or how the game is played. This could be considered analogous to the approach, enter and exit requirements for employee work areas. See the commentary to Section 1111.4.1.

The Access Board included requirements for many types of recreational facilities in the 2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design. The 2017 edition of ICC A117.1 includes a chapter with technical information on accessibility for many types of recreational facilities. Chapter 10 in ICC A117.1 contains technical provisions for amusement rides; recreational boating facilities; exercise machinery and equipment; fishing piers and platforms; golf facilities; miniature golf facilities; play areas; swimming pools; wading pools; hot tubs; spas and shooting and firing positions.

1111.2 Facilities serving Group R-2, R-3 and R-4 occupancies. Recreational facilities that serve Group R-2, R-3 and Group R-4 occupancies shall comply with Sections 1111.2 through 1111.2.3, as applicable.

Group R-2, R-3 and R-4 facilities are addressed in Sections 1111.2 through 1111.2.3 so that equitable opportunity for use

===== Page 1342 =====
by all occupants of a single or multiple-building site would be evaluated.

1111.2.1 Facilities serving Accessible units. In Group R-2 and R-4 occupancies where recreational facilities serve Accessible units, every recreational facility of each type serving Accessible units shall be accessible.

See Sections 1108.6.2.3.1 and 1108.6.4.1 for when Accessible units are required in Group R-2 and R-4 facilities. Where a facility such as a dormitory or group home has Accessible units, any recreational facilities that might serve the residents must also be accessible to the extent specified in Section 1111.4. Examples include an accessible route to the edge of a sand volleyball court, and an accessible route to and into a pool.

1111.2.2 Facilities serving Type A and Type B units in a single building. In Group R-2, R-3 and R-4 occupancies where recreational facilities serve a single building containing Type A units or Type B units, 25 percent, but not less than one, of each type of recreational facility shall be accessible. Every recreational facility of each type on a site shall be considered to determine the total number of each type that is required to be accessible.

Many multiple-family developments include common recreational facilities, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, playgrounds, etc., which are available for use by residents of the complex. In some cases, there may be more than one type of recreational facility located at different points within the development. This section establishes the criterion that 25 percent, but not less than one, of each type of recreational facility has to be accessible. For example, if two separate tennis court areas are provided, one containing two tennis courts and the other containing seven, then a total of three courts must be accessible. In a single building site, the three accessible tennis courts could all be in one area or divided between the two areas. This satisfies the requirement that at least 25 percent of the total number of courts be made accessible.

1111.2.3 Facilities serving Type A and Type B units in multiple buildings. In Group R-2, R-3 and R-4 occupancies on a single site where multiple buildings containing Type A units or Type B units are served by recreational facilities, 25 percent, but not less than one, of each type of recreational facility serving each building shall be accessible. The total number of each type of recreational facility that is required to be accessible shall be determined by considering every recreational facility of each type serving each building on the site.

In a multiple-building site, the same criteria apply as for single building sites. However, in addition, if certain facilities only serve certain buildings, at least 25 percent of the facilities in each area must be accessible. For example, if two separate tennis court areas are provided, each serving a specific building, and one contains two tennis courts while the other contains seven courts, then 25 percent at each location, for a total of three courts, must be accessible. While the number is the same for the single building, the distribution requirement is different. In this case, one tennis court in the two-court area must be made accessible and two of the tennis courts in the seven-court area must be made accessible. This satisfies the requirement that at least 25 percent of the courts for each building are made accessible. If all tennis courts serve all of the buildings, then the distribution could be the same as discussed in Section 1111.2.2.

1111.3 Other occupancies. Recreational facilities not falling within the purview of Section 1111.2 shall be accessible.

Where tennis courts, pools, baseball diamonds, playgrounds or other recreational facilities are provided in occupancies other than the Group R-2, R-3 or R-4 occupancies discussed in Section 1111.2, all facilities must be accessible. For recreational facilities associated with Groups R-2, R-3 and R-4, see the commentaries for Sections 1111.2 through 1111.2.3.

1111.4 Recreational facilities. Recreational facilities shall be accessible and shall be on an accessible route to the extent specified in this section.

Accessible recreation facilities must have an accessible route to them. Depending on the type of facility, additional requirements may be indicated to provide further access, such as into a pool, or on the playing surface of a miniature golf course. It is not intended to change the nature of the game or how the game is played. The intent is to allow for someone to participate to the best of their abilities.

1111.4.1 Area of sport activity. Each area of sport activity shall be on an accessible route and shall not be required to be accessible except as provided for in Sections 1111.4.2 through 1111.4.15.

Area of sports activity is defined in Chapter 2. The broad term, "area of sports activity," addresses indoor and outdoor courts, fields and other sport areas. Examples include basketball and tennis courts; practice areas for

===== Page 1343 =====
dance or gymnastics; baseball, soccer and football fields; skating rinks; running tracks; and skateboard parks. The phrase "portion... where the play or practice of a sport occurs" varies depending on the sports. Football fields include the playing field boundary lines, the end zones and the space between the boundary lines and safety border. Players may run or be pushed into this safety zone during play. In football, this safety zone is used as part of the playing field and is therefore included in the area of sports activity.

This section requires an accessible route to the edge of a recreational facility. See Sections 1111.4.2 through 1111.4.15 for additional requirements or exceptions for specific types of recreational facilities.

1111.4.2 Team or player seating. At least one wheelchair space shall be provided in team or player seating areas serving areas of sport activity.

Exception: Wheelchair spaces shall not be required in team or player seating areas serving bowling lanes that are not required to be accessible in accordance with Section 1111.4.3.

Accessible seating for sports teams and players is a logical requirement that allows players to maintain team participation when injured as well as allowing for coaches or players with mobility impairments to participate. Where there is team seating provided on opposite sides for home and visitor teams, an accessible route must be provided to both locations (see Commentary Figure 1111.4.2). The exception acknowledges that only 5 percent of lanes in bowling facilities are required to be provided with an accessible route. Since teams sit at their lanes while playing, this provides a balance between player seating and access to the accessible bowling lanes (see Section 1111.4.3).

1111.4.3 Bowling lanes. An accessible route shall be provided to at least 5 percent, but not less than one of each type of bowling lane.

Bowling lanes are typically lower than the main circulation routes and viewing areas in bowling facilities for sightline purposes. Since bowling lanes repeat each other, only 5 percent of bowling lanes and their associated team or player seating areas are required to be on an accessible route. See also Section 1111.4.2.

1111.4.4 Court sports. In court sports, at least one accessible route shall directly connect both sides of the court.

Most court sports require opponents to switch sides during the course of the game. An accessible route is required to both sides of the court without leaving the immediate area. In a multicourt facility, such as a tennis facility, best design practice would provide the accessible routes so that they would not have to go through other courts where someone else may be playing. See Commentary Figure 1111.4.4.

1111.4.5 Raised boxing or wrestling rings. Raised boxing or wrestling rings are not required to be accessible or to be on an accessible route.

Boxing and wrestling rings are raised to allow for a line of sight from the audience to the ring, similar to a stage. These unique types of facilities are not required to be on an accessible route or be accessible. This exception is in step with several of the general exceptions in Section 1103.2 where small, raised areas provided for specific purposes are exempted. As with any other exception, there is nothing that would prohibit the installation of specialized equipment to allow a person with a disability to perform the particular function.

1111.4.6 Raised refereeing, judging and scoring areas. Raised structures used solely for refereeing, judging or scoring a sport are not required to be accessible or to be on an accessible route.

In order for a judge or referee to see the entire playing surface, they may be sitting on a raised platform or high chair. Where these areas are used solely for refereeing, judging or scoring, they are not required to be accessible or be on an accessible route (see Commentary Figure 1111.4.6).

This exception is in step with several of the general exceptions in Section 1103.2 where small, raised areas provided for specific purposes are exempted. As with any other exception, there is nothing that would prohibit the installation of specialized equipment to allow a person with a disability to perform the particular function.

1111.4.7 Animal containment areas. Animal containment areas that are not within public use areas are not required to be accessible or to be on an accessible route.

“Public-use areas” are defined as “…made available to the general public.” There may be areas of a facility, such as a horse-riding arena, where portions of the facility are not open to the general public. Those areas are not required to be accessible or be on an accessible route. Areas such as the riding arena would have to be on an accessible route. The arena itself, as an area of sports activity, could be a dirt floor.

1111.4.8 Amusement rides. Amusement rides that move persons through a fixed course within a defined area shall comply with Sections 1111.4.8.1 through 1111.4.8.3.

===== Page 1344 =====
Exception: Mobile or portable amusement rides shall not be required to be accessible.

Amusement rides that move a person through a fixed course and along a specific route are required to be accessible to the extent specified. Typical examples would be a roller coaster, a Ferris wheel, a ride that moves the rider along to view different scenes (e.g., omnimover or rail transport), or pendulum or swing rides. See Commentary Figures 1111.4.8(1) and (2). There is an exception for these types of rides that are mobile or portable. For example, the portable amusement rides that come in each year for the State or County Fair are not required to meet this section. There are also many types of rides that do not have a fixed course. Rides where the route is controlled by the user, such as go-carts or bumper cars, are not required to meet this section. These rides should have the ride entrance on an accessible route, but they are not required to provide the additional accessible features specified in Sections 1111.4.8.1 through 1111.4.8.3.

1111.4.8.1 Load and unload areas. Load and unload areas serving amusement rides shall be accessible and be on an accessible route. Where load and unload areas have more than one loading or unloading position, at least one loading and unloading position shall be on an accessible route.

Sections 1111.4.8.1, 1111.4.8.2 and 1111.4.8.3 work together. For the types of rides scoped by Section 1111.4.8, an accessible route must be provided from the ride entrance to at least one of the areas where people will get on and off the ride. Since it is difficult for someone to wait on a sloped surface, Section 1110.9 allows for a platform lift to be used to provide an accessible route. In accordance with Section 1104.5, that platform lift should be in the same area as the general circulation route.

For the ride itself, there are the options of having a person transfer from his or her wheelchair to a ride seat or to physically move the wheelchair onto the ride [see Commentary Figures 1111.4.8.1(2)]. Sometimes, a type of transfer device, such as a transfer board, is necessary for someone to slide from the wheelchair over a gap to the ride seat. This transfer point must also be on an accessible route. If there is a transfer situation, best design practice may include a location for the wheelchair to be stored while the person is on the ride or a means to move the wheelchair to a different unload area.

1111.4.8.2 Wheelchair spaces, ride seats designed for transfer and transfer devices. Where amusement rides are in the load and unload position, the following shall be on an accessible route.

1 The position serving a wheelchair space.

2 Amusement ride seats designed for transfer.

3 Transfer devices.

See the commentary to Sections 1111.4.8 and 1111.4.8.1.

1111.4.8.3 Minimum number. Amusement rides shall provide at least one wheelchair space, amusement ride seat designed for transfer or transfer device.

Exceptions:

1. Amusement rides that are controlled or operated by the rider are not required to comply with this section.

2. Amusement rides designed primarily for children, where children are assisted on and off the ride by an adult, are not required to comply with this section.

3. Amusement rides that do not provide seats that are built-in or mechanically fastened shall not be required to comply with this section.

See the commentary to Sections 1111.4.8 and 1111.4.8.1.

The exceptions apply to types of rides that need an accessible route to the load and unload areas, but do not need to have the ability to transfer directly from the wheelchair to a ride seat. If a person has limited mobility, they may be able to walk a short distance to board a ride. An example of Exception 1 would be bumper cars or go-carts. An example of Exception 2 would be a merry-go-round or other ride designed specifically for small children, even though an adult may choose to go on the ride with that child. An example of a ride that does not provide seats might be a water flume ride that uses inner tubes. See Commentary Figure 1110.4.8.3(2).

1111.4.9 Recreational boating facilities. Boat slips required to be accessible by Sections 1111.4.9.1 and 1111.4.9.2 and boarding piers at boat launch ramps required to be accessible by Section 1111.4.9.3 shall be on an accessible route.

This section addresses two different types of piers that are found in a harbor or on a lake: the slips where people dock and store their boats and the piers adjacent to boat launch ramps. ICC A117.1 offers technical data on where to provide that accessible route. There are allowances for the difference in elevation between the land piers and a floating pier, as well as consideration of the different water levels caused by tides and drought.

===== Page 1345 =====
1111.4.9.1 Boat slips. Accessible boat slips shall be provided in accordance with Table 1111.4.9.1. All units on the site shall be combined to determine the number of accessible boat slips required. Where the number of boat slips is not identified, each 12 m of boat slip edge provided along the perimeter of the pier shall be counted as one boat slip for the purpose of this section.

Exception: Boat slips not designed for embarking or disembarking are not required to be accessible or be on an accessible route.

Marinas offer separate slips for types of boats, sometimes separating sail boats from power boats or offering slips of different lengths and widths to accommodate boats of different sizes (see Commentary Figure 1111.4.9.1). Similar to parking spaces for cars, the number of accessible spaces depends on the number of slips provided. The total number of slips provided in the arena may be added together to determine the number of slips that have to be on an accessible route.

In accordance with Section 1111.4.9.2, the accessible slips must be dispersed among the different types of slips provided. The dispersion requirements are not intended to result in more accessible slips than those required by Section 1111.4.9.1.

If there are locations where slips are provided but it is not intended for persons to get on or off their boats, such as areas to get gas, an accessible route is not required to those areas and no accessible slips are required to be dispersed to those locations.

1111.4.9.2 Dispersion. Accessible boat slips shall be dispersed throughout the various types of boat slips provided. Where the minimum number of accessible boat slips has been met, no further dispersion shall be required.

See commentary to Section 1111.4.9.1.
1111.4.9.3 Boarding piers at boat launch ramps. Where boarding piers are provided at boat launch ramps, at least 5 percent, but not less than one, of the boarding piers shall be accessible.

Boat launch ramps are designated locations where people can move their boat between a towing trailer and the water. If the boat launch has an adjacent boarding pier to allow people to load or access their boat when it is in the water, that boarding pier is required to be accessible (see Commentary Figure 1111.4.9.3). If a boarding pier is not provided at a boat launch ramp, this provision is not intended to require that a boarding pier be provided.

1111.4.10 Exercise machines and equipment. At least one of each type of exercise machine and equipment shall be on an accessible route.

Where exercise equipment is provided, an accessible route is required to at least one of each type of machine provided. There are no requirements to provide transfer devices or change the nature of the equipment itself (ICC A117.1 has a specific exception for exercise equipment stating that it does not have to meet the height, grasping or force requirements for operable parts). Access to exercise equipment is necessary for persons who are in a recovery process from a temporary disability, and for persons with disabilities who need to maintain the muscles that they use to operate their equipment. Regarding “type,” it is not the intent to require an accessible route to each group of exercise bikes simply because they happen to be supplied by different manufacturers. Generally, the muscle group exercised by a piece of equipment determines its type.

1111.4.11 Fishing piers and platforms. Fishing piers and platforms shall be accessible and be on an accessible route.

Fishing piers and platforms are also required on an accessible route. In the ICC A117.1 standard there are allowances for ramps where height differences between the land elevation and water elevation vary too greatly because of tides or topography, similar to boat piers. There is also the intent to coordinate with safety requirements due to concerns about falls. Some fishing platforms and piers do not have a barrier or guard, and the accessibility provisions do not require one. However, if a 1050 mm-high guard is provided for safety concerns, the requirement for a lower portion of rail to allow for a sitting person to fish is waived.

1111.4.12 Miniature golf facilities. Miniature golf facilities shall comply with Sections 1111.4.12.1 through 1111.4.12.3.

Miniature golf has been a family pastime for decades. Undulating or sloped playing surfaces, changes in level, shooting through an object with a surprise as to where it comes out, water and other obstacles all help make the game interesting. The provisions in the following subsections allow for access to at least portions of the course.

1111.4.12.1 Minimum number. At least 50 percent of holes on miniature golf courses shall be accessible.

Half of the holes provided must be on an accessible route and meet the technical criteria in ICC A117.1. The first hole on the course, considered the start of play, must be accessible. The standard allows for the accessible route to be on the playing surface or

===== Page 1346 =====
adjacent where a certain reach can be maintained. Limited curbs are permitted across the route in order to keep the ball in play.

1111.4.12.2 Miniature golf course configuration. Miniature golf courses shall be configured so that the accessible holes are consecutive. Miniature golf courses shall provide an accessible route from the last accessible hole to the course entrance or exit without requiring travel through any other holes on the course.

Exception: One break in the sequence of consecutive holes shall be permitted provided that the last hole on the miniature golf course is the last hole in the sequence.

In order that a person does not have to move through other holes that may be in play, the accessible route must not travel through nonaccessible holes. There can be a one break in the accessible holes, as long as the last hole is included in the route. Traditionally that is the hole where you can shoot to win a free game or a prize. For example, in an 18-hole course, you could make holes 1 through 5 and 15 through 18 the accessible holes. Possible routes will vary de-pending on the layout of the facility.

1111.4.12.3 Accessible route. Holes required to comply with Section 1111.4.12.1, including the start of play, shall be on an accessible route.

See the commentary to Section 1111.4.12.1.

1111.4.13 Play areas. Play areas containing play components designed and constructed for children shall be located on an accessible route.

ICC A117.1 includes technical criteria for how many and which pieces of playground equipment must be accessible. This is a percentage of the total play components provided and includes dispersion dependent on the types provided. This requirement for an accessible route would be applicable to both interior and exterior playgrounds. This is not a requirement for an accessible route to all items on a playground, but rather to the accessible components and entry points required in ICC A117.1. For example, elevated play components that are connected may be accessed from the ground by one ramp or one set of transfer steps (see Commentary Figure 1111.4.13).

1111.4.14 Swimming pools, wading pools, hot tubs and spas. Swimming pools, wading pools, cold baths, hot tubs and spas shall be accessible and be on an accessible route.

Exceptions:

1. Catch pools or a designated section of a pool used as a terminus for a water slide flume shall not be required to provide an accessible means of entry, provided that a portion of the catch pool edge is on an accessible route.

2. Where spas, cold baths or hot tubs are provided in a cluster, at least 5 percent, but not less than one of each type of spa, cold bath or hot tub in each cluster, shall be accessible and be on an accessible route.

3. Swimming pools, wading pools, spas, cold baths and hot tubs that are required to be accessible by Sections 1111.2.2 and 1111.2.3 are not required to provide accessible means of entry into the water.

Swimming pools are required to have a route to them and a route into the water. ICC A117.1 offers several different options for access into the water depending the type and size of the pool (see Commentary Figure 1111.4.14). Technical criteria are provided for sloped entries, ramps, pool lifts, transfer walls, transfer steps and pool stairs.

For Exception 1, see the commentary to Section 1111.4.14.2.

In accordance with Exception 2, where spas, cold baths or hot tubs are grouped, 5 percent must be accessible. In accordance with ICC A117.1, the accessible spa, cold bath or hot tub can use a pool or lift or a transfer wall to allow access into the water.

Exception 3 is an exception for the route into the water for swimming pools that serve Type A and Type B dwelling units in Groups R-2, R-3 and R-4. Group R-2 occupies with Accessible units, such as dormitories, cannot use this exception.

1111.4.14.1 Raised diving boards and diving platforms. Raised diving boards and diving platforms are not required to be accessible or to be on an accessible route.

Raised diving boards and diving platforms are not required to be accessible. It would be impractical to provide ramps or lifts to very small areas.

1111.4.14.2 Water slides. Water slides are not required to be accessible or to be on an accessible route.

Water slides are not required to be accessible. It would be impractical to provide ramps or lifts to these very small areas. When the swimming pool at the bottom is only for the slide, swimmers are not permitted there for safety reasons. That catch pool is not required to have a route into the water (see Section 1111.4.14, Exception 1).

1111.4.15 Shooting facilities with firing positions. Where shooting facilities with firing positions are designed and constructed at a site, at least 5 percent, but not less than one, of each type

===== Page 1347 =====
of firing position shall be accessible and be on an accessible route.

Exception: Shooting facilities with firing positions on freestanding platforms that are elevated more than 3.6 m above grade, provided that the aggregate area of the elevated firing positions is not more than 46 m², are not required to be accessible.

There are a variety of shooting facilities that are used for target practice. Typically, this is practice for shooting bows and arrows, handguns, rifles or shotguns. Participants aim at fixed targets, decoys or clay pigeons. These facilities can be constructed inside or outside. An accessible route is required to at least 5 percent of the firing position at each type of arrangement provided. ICC A117.1 will require a level space and a turning radius at that firing position.

The exception is to allow for raised firing stations so that someone could practice shooting from a tree stand. The size is similar to what is allowed for press boxes.

## SECTION 1112 SIGNAGE

1112.1 Signs. Required accessible elements shall be identified by the International Symbol of Accessibility at the following locations.

1 Accessible parking spaces required by Section 1106.2.

Exception: Where the total number of parking spaces provided is four or less, identification of accessible parking spaces is not required.

2 Accessible parking spaces required by Section 1106.3.

Exception: In Group I-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 facilities, where parking spaces are assigned to specific dwelling units or sleeping units, identification of accessible parking spaces is not required.

3 Accessible passenger loading zones.

4 Accessible toilet or bathing rooms where not all toilet or bathing rooms are accessible.

5 Accessible entrances where not all entrances are accessible.

6 Accessible check-out aisles where not all aisles are accessible. The sign, where provided, shall be above the check-out aisle in the same location as the checkout aisle number or type of check-out identification.

7 Accessible dressing, fitting and locker rooms where not all such rooms are accessible.

8 Accessible areas of refuge in accordance with Section 1009.9.
9 Exterior areas for assisted rescue in accordance with Section 1009.9.

10 In recreational facilities, lockers that are required to be accessible in accordance with Section 1110.10.

Identification of accessible elements can be accomplished by use of an International Symbol of Accessibility (see Commentary Figure 1112.1). These symbols are international in that they are recognized throughout the world as identifying accessibility. The signs listed here are typically visual signage. Raised letters and braille are not required.

There are 11 specific circumstances in which required accessible elements are to be identified, as indicated in Items 1 through 10 of this section. Generally, these are locations in which not all of the facilities provided are accessible and, therefore, it is necessary to identify those that are accessible so that they can be readily recognized by the intended user. For example, Section 1106.2 specifies the required number of accessible parking spaces. If these are not identified by signage, it would be difficult and unnecessarily inconvenient for one to identify their location. One of the concepts embodied by the code is to mainstream accessibility in recognition that many of the features making facilities and elements accessible are also useful and of benefit to people without disabilities. Part of this principle includes the idea that if an element is universally usable by people both with and without disabilities, there is no need for signage specifically identifying the element as being accessible. Hence, the signage requirements generally address circumstances in which not all of the elements will be accessible. Items 9 and 10 require the International Symbol of Accessibility in order to identify elements important to keep open as part of an accessible means of egress.

Item 10 is only to identify lockers in recreational facilities where use of a locker is temporary for the duration of the visit to the recreational facility. It is not intended to apply to lockers in other locations, such as lockers provided for students in school. In those situations, the identification of the assigned locker as accessible might be perceived to have negative connotations for the student assigned to the locker.

There are two exceptions specific to identification of accessible parking spaces in Items 1 and 2. Note that the spaces must be sized in accordance with Sections 1106.2 and 1106.3; the exceptions are only for the identification. Item 1 has an exception for parking where four or fewer spaces are

===== Page 1348 =====
provided. To require an accessible space to be reserved when it involves from 25 to 100 percent of the parking provided is an undue hardship to the building's employees and customers. With the area equal to an accessible parking space being provided, accessible parking is still available if it is needed, it is just not reserved. In Item 2, where a parking lot has assigned spaces for the people who live there, the identification to reserve an accessible space is not required. Who is assigned to that space can be handled administratively when a resident needs an accessible parking space.

1112.2 Signs identifying toilet or bathing rooms. Signs required in Section 403.4 of SBC 701 identifying toilet rooms and bathing rooms shall be visual characters, raised characters and braille complying with ICC A117.1. Where pictograms are provided as designations for toilet rooms and bathing rooms, the pictograms shall have visual characters, raised characters and braille complying with ICC A117.1.

SBC 701 Section 403.4 requires each toilet room or bathing room to be provided with signs indicating if the room is for men, women or either. SBC 701 Section 403.1.2 requires all single-user toilet rooms, including family/assisted use toilet rooms, to be identified as available for all persons, regardless of sex. ICC A117.1 includes requirements for the location of the sign in relationship to the door; any pictograms; the visual requirements for font, size, glare and contrast; and requirements for both raised letters and braille. These can be the same sign, or multiple signs.

1112.3 Directional signage. Directional signage indicating the route to the nearest like accessible element shall be provided at the following locations. These directional signs shall include the International Symbol of Accessibility and sign characters shall meet the visual character requirements in accordance with ICC A117.1.

1 Inaccessible building entrances.

2 Inaccessible public toilets and bathing facilities.

3 Elevators not serving an accessible route.

4 At each separate-sex toilet and bathing room indicating the location of the nearest family/assisted use toilet or bathing room where provided in accordance with Section 1110.2.1.

5 At exits and exit stairways serving a required accessible space, but not providing an approved accessible means of egress, signage shall be provided in accordance with Section 1009.10.
6 Where drinking fountains for persons using wheelchairs and drinking fountains for standing persons are not located adjacent to each other, directional signage shall be provided indicating the location of the other drinking fountains.

The direction signs listed here are typically visual signage. Raised letters and braille are not required.

There are circumstances in which it is useful and necessary to locate directional signage at certain inaccessible elements to indicate the route to the nearest like accessible element. For example, not all building entrances are required to be accessible (see Section 1105). Should a person in a wheelchair happen to approach an inaccessible building entrance at an unfamiliar facility, it is appropriate to provide direction indicating where the nearest accessible entrance is located. The same circumstance presents itself at inaccessible public toilet and bathing facilities, at elevators that do not serve an accessible route and at exits that are not part of the accessible means of egress (see Section 1009 for additional information on accessible means of egress). Directional signage is also needed to point people to specific accessible features they may need, such assembly and mercantile occupancies where family/assisted-use accessible toilet and bathing facilities are required or when high/low drinking fountains are not located adjacent to each other (Items 4 and 6).

Requiring the sign to meet visual character requirements allows for the sign to be read at the viewing distance. For example, if an entrance is not accessible and the closest a person using a wheelchair can get to the entrance is the bottom of the steps, the sign can be on the door and be large enough for a person to read from the bottom of the steps, or the sign can be smaller and placed at the bottom of the steps. Both methods would provide the information on where the accessible entrance is located.

This requirement for directional signage works in conjunction with the fact that everything is initially assumed to be accessible. Some items are not required to be identified by the International Symbols of Accessibility in the interest of mainstreaming. See the general comments to this chapter and the commentary to Section 1112.1 for a further discussion of mainstreaming.

1112.4 Other signs. Signage indicating special accessibility provisions shall be provided as shown.

1 Each assembly area required to comply with Section 1109.2.7 shall provide a sign

===== Page 1349 =====
notifying patrons of the availability of assistive listening systems. The sign shall comply with ICC A117.1 requirements for visual characters and include the International Symbol of Access for Hearing Loss.

Exception: Where ticket offices or windows are provided, signs are not required at each assembly area provided that signs are displayed at each ticket office or window informing patrons of the availability of assistive listening systems.

2 At each door to an area of refuge providing direct access to a stairway, exterior area for assisted rescue, exit stairway, exit passageway or exit discharge, signage shall be provided in accordance with Section 1013.4.

3 At areas of refuge, signage shall be provided in accordance with Section 1009.11.

4 At exterior areas for assisted rescue, signage shall be provided in accordance with Section 1009.11.

5 At two-way communication systems, signage shall be provided in accordance with Section 1009.8.2.

6 In interior exit stairways and ramps, floor level signage shall be provided in accordance with Section 1023.9.

7 Signs identifying the type of access provided on amusement rides required to be accessible by Section 1111.4.8 shall be provided at entries to queues and waiting lines. In addition, where accessible unload areas also serve as accessible load areas, signs indicating the location of the accessible load and unload areas shall be provided at entries to queues and waiting lines. These directional sign characters shall meet the visual character requirements in accordance with ICC A117.1.

The signs listed here are typically visual signage. Raised letters and braille are only required by Item 2.

It is considered desirable that all the requirements for accessible signage be in one location. Item 1 requires signage indicating that assistive listening systems are provided when they are required by Section 1109.2.7. The sign may be located within each of the assembly rooms, typically near the entrance, or at the ticket office. The sign should also include the International Symbol of Access for Hearing Loss. (See Commentary Figure 1112.1).
Items 2 through 6 are references to signage criteria in specific sections that have been mainstreamed in Chapter 10.

Item 7 requires one or two signs at the start of the waiting line for an amusement ride. The intent is that the rider is aware of the options before waiting in line for the ride. One sign will provide information on what transfer options are available. On most rides, for crowd control, the way in and the way out are two different paths. When the ride uses the unload area (instead of the load area) as the accessible load and unload area, directions for that alternative route must be provided.

1112.5 Variable message signs. Where provided in the locations in Sections 1112.5.1 and 1112.5.2, variable message signs shall comply with the variable message sign requirements of ICC A117.1.

* ICC A117.1 defines Variable Message Signs (VMS) as, “Electronic signs that have a message with the capacity to change by means of scrolling, streaming, or paging across a background.” Requirements vary depending on whether the sign resolution is high or low. Requirements for high-resolution signs are consistent with printed signs. ICC A117.1 language modifies requirements for visual signs primarily by requiring increased character height and spacing for low-resolution VMS. Even for users with unimpaired vision, there is strong research evidence that character height in low-resolution VMS, such as the LED signs that are common in the transportation environment and elsewhere, must be approximately 30 percent greater than for equivalent print signs or VMS with high resolution. The requirements for increased character height, etc., for low-resolution VMS are not applicable to high-resolution VMS, such as video (see Commentary Figure 1112.5).

The section does not “require” that VMS be installed in any facility type, but instead requires that where provided within transportation facilities and emergency shelters, VMS comply with the standard and are usable by most of the population.

1112.5.1 Transportation facilities. Where provided in transportation facilities, variable message signs conveying transportation-related information shall comply with Section 1112.5.

* The phrasing “conveying transportation-related information” was included to ensure the application of the ICC A117.1 VMS requirements to signs that are necessary for disseminating transportation information. Signs presenting information that is not necessary for transportation would be exempt. For example, neither a VMS that advertised dining options in an airport nor a television set

===== Page 1350 =====
in the waiting area that had closed captioning of a news program would be required to comply with the standard's VMS provisions. However, any VMS that indicated flight departure times or gate assignments would be regulated.

Signage in transportation facilities is important for several reasons. Riders with reduced vision are especially dependent on public transportation for travel and are required by the ADA to have information that is equivalent to that provided to riders having unimpaired vision. This section coordinates the code requirements with those of the ADA. Currently, Sections E109 and E110 in Appendix E address some signage requirements within transportation facilities, stations and airports. The VMS are often used within transportation facilities (see Sections E109.2.2.2, E109.2.2.3, E109.2.7 and E110.3) as a primary means of conveying information to riders. Since the ICC A117 committee has provided specific regulations for these signs, it is appropriate to reference these provisions so that designers and building officials know exactly what the technical requirements for the signs are. As noted earlier, this section does not “require” VMS, but it is intended to ensure that, “where provided,” VMS comply with the requirements established by the ICC A117.1 committee.

The exception for equivalent audible information (see Section 1112.5.2) is not included in this section. This is done not only to coordinate with the ADA, but also because in many such facilities, the audible information is simply not easily understood. Anyone who has stood on a subway or train platform and tried to understand an audible message at the same time that the train is pulling up to the platform will understand this exclusion. Because of the problems with hearing messages in many transportation facilities, the audible message delivery is simply not considered as being adequate to replace or eliminate the clear visual sign information.

1112.5.2 Emergency shelters. Where provided in buildings that are designated as emergency shelters, variable message signs conveying emergency-related information shall comply with Section 1112.5.

Exception: Where equivalent information is provided in an audible manner, variable message signs are not required to comply with ICC A117.1.

The phrasing “conveying emergency-related information” was included in the section to ensure the application of ICC A117.1 VMS requirements to signs that are necessary for disseminating information in emergency shelters. Signs presenting information that is not necessary for the emergency use of facilities would be exempt. For example, in the case of an emergency shelter located at a school, only the signage related to the shelter would be covered. The signage dealing with the school and what school activities were occurring that week would not be expected to comply with the VMS requirements.

Emergency shelters are typically identified by a jurisdiction when they are studying emergency planning or working with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to develop community plans. Although any building could ultimately be pressed into service as an emergency shelter in some circumstances, this text applies only to those facilities that are designated in advance or during that planning stage as an intended shelter. In many communities, this may include certain schools, civic administration buildings or even large convention facilities. Emergency-related information provided by VMS in emergency shelters is most likely to be information or instructions regarding additional problems or the recovery process.

The emergency shelter provisions contain an exception that would eliminate the requirement to meet the VMS provisions of the standard. Where audible information is conveyed that is either the same or equivalent to the information provided by the sign, compliance with ICC A117.1's VMS requirements is not needed. The VMS provides the information in a visual method and ICC A117.1 provisions ensure that the information is clearly visible and legible to both the general population and to people with some level of visual impairment. Providing the equivalent information in an audible manner makes the information accessible to people with severe visual impairment or who are blind.

===== Page 1351 =====
## Bibliography

The following resource materials were used in the preparation of the commentary for this chapter of the code:

1 24 CFR, Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines (FHAG). Washington, DC: Department of Housing and Urban Development, 1991.

2 36 CFR, Parts 1190 and 1191 Final Rule, The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Accessibility Guidelines; Architectural Barriers Act (ABA) Accessibility Guidelines. Washington, DC: Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board, July 23, 2004.

3 42 USC 3601-88, Fair Housing Amendments Act (FHA). Washington, DC: United States Code, 1988.

4 2010 ADA Standard for Accessible Design. Washington, DC: Department of Justice, September 15, 2010.

5 “Accessibility and Egress for People with Physical Disabilities.” Falls Church, VA: CABO Board for the Coordination of the Model Codes Report, 1993.

6 ASME A17.1/CSA B44-07, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators. New York, NY: American National Standards Institute, 2007.

7 ASME A18.1-05, Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts. New York, NY: American National Standards Institute, 2005.

8 DOJ 28 CFR, Parts 36-91, Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Washington, DC: Department of Justice, 1991.

9 DOJ 28 CFR, Part 36-91 (Appendix A), ADA Accessibility Guidelines for Building and Facilities (ADAAG). Washington, DC: Department of Justice, 1991.

10 Fair Housing Act Design Manual. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Revised 1998.

11 FED-STD-795-88, Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards. Washington, DC: General Services Administration; Department of Defense; Department of Housing and Urban Development; U.S. Postal Service, 1988.

12 Final Report of the HUD Review of the Fair Housing Accessibility Requirements and the 2003 International Building Code (IBC). Washington, DC: February 18, 2005 (Docket No FR-4943-N-02).

13 Final Report of the HUD Review of the Fair Housing Accessibility Requirements and the 2006 International Building Code (IBC). Washington, DC: May 31, 2007 (Docket No FR-5136-N-01).

14 HUD 24 CFR, Part 100, Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, 1991.

15 “Pathfinder Tactile Tile Demonstration Test Project.” Miami, FL: Metro-Dade Transit Agency, 1988.

16 “Tactile Warnings to Promote Safety in the Vicinity of Transit Platform Edges.” Washington, DC: Urban Mass Transportation Administration, 1987.

17 Vital Health Statistics, Series 10, No. 135, Tables 1 & 2. 1977 National Health Interview Survey. Huntsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics, 1977.

===== Page 1352 =====
## TABLES AND FIGURES OF CHAPTER 11

TABLE 1105.1.1

PUBLIC ENTRANCE WITH POWER-OPERATED DOOR \( ^{a} \)

<table>OCCUPANCYBUILDING OCCUPANT LOAD GREATER THANA-1, A-2, A-3, A-4300B, M, R-1500</table>

a. In mixed-use facilities where the total sum of the building occupant load is greater than those listed, the most restrictive building occupant load shall apply.

TABLE 1106.2

ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES

<table>TOTAL PARKING SPACES PROVIDED IN PARKING FACILITIESREQUIRED MINIMUM NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE SPACES1 to 25126 to 50251 to 75376 to 1004101 to 1505151 to 2006201 to 3007301 to 4008401 to 5009501 to 1,0002% of totalMore than 1,00020, plus one for each 100 over 1,000</table>

TABLE 1108.6.1.1

ACCESSIBLE DWELLING UNITS AND SLEEPING UNITS

<table>TOTAL NUMBER OF UNITS PROVIDEDMINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE UNITS ASSOCIATED WITHOUT ROLL-IN SHOWERSMINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE UNITS ASSOCIATED WITH ROLL-IN SHOWERSTOTAL NUMBER OF REQUIRED ACCESSIBLE UNITS1 to 2510126 to 5020251 to 7531476 to 100415101 to 150527151 to 200628201 to 3007310301 to 4008412401 to 5009413501 to 1,0002% of total1% of total3% of totalOver 1,00020, plus 1 for each 100, or fraction thereof over 1,00010, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,00030, plus 2 for each 100 over 1,000</table>

===== Page 1353 =====
TABLE 1109.2.2.1

ACCESSIBLE WHEELCHAIR SPACES

<table>CAPACITY OF SEATING IN ASSEMBLY AREASMINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF WHEELCHAIR SPACES4 to 25126 to 50251 to 1004101 to 3005301 to 5006501 to 5,0006, plus 1 for each 150, or fraction thereof, between 501 through 5,0005,001 and over36 plus 1 for each 200, or fraction thereof, over 5,000</table>

TABLE 1109.2.7.1

RECEIVERS FOR ASSISTIVE LISTENING SYSTEMS

<table>CAPACITY OF SEATING IN ASSEMBLY AREASMINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF RECEIVERSMINIMUM NUMBER OF RECEIVERS TO BE HEARING-AID COMPATIBLE50 or less2251 to 2002, plus 1 per 25 seats over 50 seats*2201 to 5002, plus 1 per 25 seats over 50 seats. *1 per 4 receivers*501 to 1,00020, plus 1 per 33 seats over 500 seats*1 per 4 receivers*1,001 to 2,00035, plus 1 per 50 seats over 1,000 seats*1 per 4 receivers*Over 2,00055, plus 1 per 100 seats over 2,000 seats*1 per 4 receivers*</table>

TABLE 1109.3

ACCESSIBLE SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITIES

<table>TOTAL SPACES IN FACILITYMINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED ACCESSIBLE SPACES1 to 2005%, but not less than 1Over 20010, plus 2% of total number of units over 200</table>

TABLE 1110.13.1

ACCESSIBLE CHECK-OUT AISLES

<table>TOTAL CHECK-OUT AISLES OF EACH FUNCTIONMINIMUM NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE CHECK-OUT AISLES OF EACH FUNCTION1 to 415 to 829 to 153Over 153, plus 20% of additional aisles</table>

===== Page 1354 =====
TABLE 111.4.9.1

BOAT SLIPS

<table>TOTAL NUMBER OF BOAT SLIPS PROVIDEDMINIMUM NUMBER OF REQUIRED ACCESSIBLE BOAT SLIPS1 to 25126 to 50251 to 1003101 to 1504151 to 3005301 to 4006401 to 5007501 to 6008601 to 7009701 to 80010801 to 90011901 to 1000121001 and over12, plus 1 for every 100, or fraction thereof, over 1,000</table>

FIGURE 1103.2.6

EXAMPLE OF THE EXCEPTION FOR RAISED AREA

===== Page 1355 =====
FIGURE 1104.3.2
EXAMPLE OF PRESS BOX ACCESSED FROM BLEACHER SEATING

FIGURE 1105.1.1
EXAMPLE OF LOW-ENERGY POWER-OPERATED DOOR

===== Page 1356 =====
FIGURE 1105.1.3
EXAMPLE OF ELEVATED WALKWAY ENTRANCE

FIGURE 1106.7
EXAMPLE OF ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES

===== Page 1357 =====
FIGURE 1108.6.1.1

DETERMINING THE NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE UNITS IN GROUP R-1

FIGURE 1108.6.2.2.2(1)

BUILDING WITH FIRE WALLS IS TREATED AS A SINGLE STRUCTURE

FIGURE 1108.6.2.2.2(2)

TWO STRUCTURALLY JOINED BUILDINGS ARE TREATED AS A SINGLE STRUCTURE

===== Page 1358 =====
FIGURE 1108.6.2.3
EXAMPLE OF SLEEPING UNIT WITH MULTIPLE BEDROOMS

TYPE B UNITS REQUIRED

FIGURE 1108.7.1.1
DWELLING UNITS ON ONE STORY

===== Page 1359 =====
TYPE B UNITS REQUIRED

FIGURE 1108.7.1.2(1)
BUILDING HAS TWO ACCESSIBLE LEVELS, EACH WITH AN ACCESSIBLE ENTRANCE ON AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE

===== Page 1360 =====
WALK TO SITE ARRIVAL POINTS AND TO OTHER BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES

FIGURE 1108.7.1.2(2)

SINGLE BUILDING WITH MULTIPLE COMMON ENTRANCES—LOWER GROUND FLOOR UNITS MAY BE COVERED

===== Page 1361 =====
FIGURE 1108.7.1.2(3)
EXAMPLE FOR GRADE CALCULATIONS

FIGURE 1108.7.2(1)
BUILDINGS WITH ELEVATOR(S): ALL SINGLE-STORY UNITS AND THE PRIMARY ENTRY
LEVEL OF MULTISTORY UNITS

===== Page 1362 =====
FIGURE 1108.7.2(2)
GROUND FLOOR UNITS IN BUILDINGS OF FOUR OR MORE UNITS

TYPE B UNITS REQUIRED

FIGURE 1108.7.3(1)
DWELLING UNITS OVER SHOPS AND GARAGES

===== Page 1363 =====
FIGURE 1108.7.3(2)
ELEVATOR TO FIRST FLOOR OF DWELLING UNITS ABOVE GRADE OR ENTRANCE LEVEL DOES NOT MAKE AN ELEVATOR BUILDING

===== Page 1364 =====
FIGURE 1108.7.4
SITE ANALYSIS TEST: THE NUMBER OF COVERED UNITS

===== Page 1365 =====
FIGURE 1108.7.5(1)
BUILDING MEETS BOTH ACCESSIBILITY CRITERIA FOR EXEMPTION

FIGURE 1108.7.5(2)

BUILDING MUST COMPLY WITH ACCESSIBILITY REQUIREMENTS

===== Page 1366 =====
FIGURE 1109.2.2.3(1)
EXAMPLE OF BOX SEATING IN A SPORTS VENUE

FIGURE 1109.2.2.3(2)
EXAMPLE OF BOX SEATING IN A THEATER

===== Page 1367 =====
FIGURE 1109.2.6
EXAMPLE OF VENUE WITH LAWN SEATING AND FIXED SEATING

FIGURE 1109.2.9.1
EXAMPLE OF DINING SURFACES

===== Page 1368 =====
FIGURE 1109.4.1.5
COURTROOM WELL WORK STATIONS

FIGURE 1110.2(1)
SIDE APPROACH WHEELCHAIR TRANSFER

===== Page 1369 =====
FIGURE 1110.2(2)

EXAMPLES OF TOILET ROOM PLANS WITH OVERLAP

===== Page 1370 =====
ALTERNATE WATER CLOSET

FIGURE 1110.2.2
EXAMPLE OF ASSISTED TOILETING REQUIREMENTS

ASSISTED BATHING ROLL-IN SHOWER – MINIMUM SIZE
FIGURE 1110.2.3(1)
EXAMPLES OF ASSISTED TOILETING REQUIREMENTS

===== Page 1371 =====
ASSISTED BATHING ROLL-IN
SHOWER – USING EXCEPTIONS
EXAMPLE 1
FIGURE 1110.2.3(2)
EXAMPLES OF ASSISTED BATHING REQUIREMENTS

ASSISTED BATHING ROLL-IN
SHOWER – USING EXCEPTIONS
EXAMPLE 2
FIGURE 1110.2.3(3)
EXAMPLES OF ASSISTED BATHING REQUIREMENTS

===== Page 1372 =====
FIGURE 1110.2.4(1)
AMBULATORY-ACCESSIBLE COMPARTMENT

FIGURE 1110.2.4(2)

WHEELCHAIR-ACCESSIBLE COMPARTMENT; OUT-SWINGING DOOR

===== Page 1373 =====
FIGURE 1110.2.4(3)
WHEELCHAIR-ACCESSIBLE COMPARTMENT; IN-SWINGING DOOR

FIGURE 1110.4
EXAMPLE OF KITCHENETTE

===== Page 1374 =====
FIGURE 1110.5.1

EXAMPLE OF DRINKING FOUNTAINS FOR PERSONS USING WHEELCHAIRS (LOW) AND STANDING PERSONS (HIGH)

FIGURE 1110.9(2)

STAIRWAY CHAIRLIFT (PHOTO COURTESY OF WHEEL-EVATOR)

===== Page 1375 =====
FIGURE 1110.11
DETECTABLE WARNINGS AT TRANSIT PLATFORM EDGE

FIGURE 1110.12
EXAMPLE OF ACCESSIBLE WORKSTATION

===== Page 1376 =====
FIGURE 1110.12.2.1
EXAMPLE OF ACCESSIBLE VISITOR'S CUBICLE

FIGURE 1110.13.1
EXAMPLE OF ACCESSIBLE CHECK-OUT COUNTER

===== Page 1377 =====
FIGURE 1110.13.2
SERVICE COUNTERS

FIGURE 1110.13.3
EXAMPLE OF SELF-SERVICE SHELVING

===== Page 1378 =====
FIGURE 1110.14
EXAMPLE OF ACCESSIBLE DRESSING ROOM

FIGURE 1111.4.2
EXAMPLE OF TEAM SEATING IN A BASEBALL DUGOUT

===== Page 1379 =====
FIGURE 1111.4.4
EXAMPLE OF COURT SPORTS

FIGURE 1111.4.6
EXAMPLE OF RAISED REFEREE STAND

===== Page 1380 =====
FIGURE 1111.4.8(1)
EXAMPLE OF AN AMUSEMENT RIDE WITH A FIXED COURSE

FIGURE 1110.4.8(2)
EXAMPLE OF AN AMUSEMENT RIDE WITH A FIXED COURSE

===== Page 1381 =====
FIGURE 1111.4.8.1(2)
EXAMPLE OF A PERSON IN A WHEELCHAIR TRANSFERRING ONTO A RIDE SEAT

FIGURE 1110.4.8.3(2)
EXAMPLE OF AN AMUSEMENT RIDE ADDRESSED IN EXCEPTION 2

===== Page 1382 =====
FIGURE 1111.4.9.1
EXAMPLE OF BOAT SLIPS

FIGURE 1111.4.9.3
EXAMPLE OF BOAT LAUNCH RAMP WITH BOARDING PIER

===== Page 1383 =====
FIGURE 1111.4.13

EXAMPLE OF AN ACCESSIBLE ROUTE TO A TRANSFER LOCATION FOR CONNECTED ELEVATED PLAY COMPONENTS

<table>POOL TYPESLOPED ENTRY/RAMPPOOL LIFTTRANSFER WALLSTRANSFER STEPSPOOL STAIRSSwimming pool (less than 300 linear feet of pool wall)XXSwimming pool (300 or more linear feet of pool wall) - two means of entry requiredXbXbXXXWave action, leisure river, and other pools where user entry is limited to one areaXXXWading poolsXSpas/hot tubsXXX</table>

Notes:

a. For technical requirements for pool entry, see ICC A117.1.

b. Primary means must be by sloped entry, ramp or pool lift. The secondary means may be by any of the permitted types.

Figure 1111.4.14

PERMITTED MEANS OF POOL ACCESS \( ^{a} \)

===== Page 1384 =====
INTERNATIONAL SYMBOL OF WHEELCHAIR ACCESS, PROPORTIONS

INTERNATIONAL SYMBOL OF WHEELCHAIR ACCESS; DISPLAY CONDITIONS

INTERNATIONAL SYMBOL OF ACCESS FOR HEARING LOSS

INTERNATIONAL TDD SYMBOL

VOLUME-CONTROLLED TELEPHONE

FIGURE 1112.1
INTERNATIONAL SYMBOLS OF ACCESSIBILITY

===== Page 1385 =====
FIGURE 1112.5
VARIABLE MESSAGE SIGNAGE

===== Page 1386 =====
This page left intentionally blank

