===== Page 1688 =====
# CHAPTER 23—WOODS

## General Comments

This chapter contains information required to design and construct buildings or structures that include wood or wood-based structural elements and is organized around the application of three design methodologies: allowable stress design (ASD), load and resistance factor design (LRFD) and conventional construction. Included are references to design and manufacturing standards for various wood and wood-based products: general construction requirements; design criteria for lateral-force-resisting systems and specific requirements for the application of the three design methods (ASD, LRFD and conventional construction). Chapter 23 includes elements of all three previous regional model codes — the BOCA \( ^{®} \)  National Building Code (BNBC); the Standard Building Code (SBC) and the Uniform Building Code \( ^{®} \)  (UBCTM). It most closely follows the format of the UBC. Acceptable standards for the manufacture of wood or wood-based products include provisions for sizes, grades (labels), quality control and certification programs, or similar methods of identification. Specific requirements and tables have been developed using referenced design methods to provide a minimum level of safety. This chapter also contains requirements both for the use of products in conjunction with wood and wood-based structural elements, and for prevention of decay. In general, only Type III, IV or V buildings may be constructed of wood. Accordingly, Chapter 23 is referenced when the combination of the occupancy (determined in Chapter 3) and the height and area of the building or structure (determined in Chapter 5) indicate that the construction (specified in Chapter 6) can be Type III, IV or V. Another basis for referencing Chapter 23 is when wood elements are used in Type I or II structures as permitted in Section 603. This chapter gives information on the application of fire-retardant-treated wood, interior wood elements and trim in these structures. All structural criteria for application of referenced standards and procedures included in Chapter 23 are based on the loading requirements of Chapter 16 or on historical performance.

Chapter 23 is not a textbook on construction. It is assumed that the reader has both the training and experience needed to understand the principles and practices of wood design and construction. Without such understanding, some sections may be misunderstood and misapplied. This commentary should help to promote better understanding of the structure and application of the methods specified in Chapter 23.

Section 2302 identifies three methods of design. Compliance with one or more is required.

Section 2303 provides reference to manufacturing standards, necessary specification criteria and use and application provisions.

Section 2304 contains general provisions for the proper design and construction of all wood structures and the use of all wood products. Note that the general provisions in Section 2304 apply to all design methods. This section also includes the typical fastening schedule, which is the minimum requirement for fastening various wood members.

Section 2305 references the American Wood Council's (AWC) Special Design Provisions for Wind and Seismic for design of lateral-force-resisting systems. It also contains provisions not found in the standard, such as design values for staples. Whether the structure is engineered using ASD or LRFD, the provisions of this section apply to the design of the lateral-force-resisting system.

Section 2306 contains provisions for the design of structures using ASD and references applicable standards. The two primary design standards are the AWC National Design Specification for Wood Construction (NDS) and SDPWS. Historically, all of the industry publications have been developed for ASD. More recently, LRFD has been introduced, making it necessary to distinguish clearly which provisions are appropriate for ASD or LRFD. As the section title implies, the provisions of this section only apply to ASD and are not appropriate for LRFD.

Because the ANSI/AWC NDS and SDPWS are dual format standards permitting both ASD and LRFD design procedures, Section 2307 also references these consensus standards for the design of structures using the LRFD methodology.

Although fairly limited in application, Section 2308 contains the prescriptive provisions for conventional construction that may be used to construct certain wood frame structures that conform to the restrictions and limitations.

===== Page 1689 =====
Limitations on the use of the conventional construction provisions in this section are provided in Section 2308.2 for a quick determination. Note that structures of otherwise conventional construction are allowed to contain portions or elements that are designed by the engineering provisions of Chapter 23 (see commentaries, Sections 2308.1.1 and 2308.8).

Section 2309 permits designs utilizing the AWC Wood Frame Construction Manual (WFCM) for buildings that fit within the WFCM's applicability limits for building size, configuration and loads as set out in that standard.

## Purpose

This chapter provides minimum guidance for the design of buildings and structures that use wood and wood-based products in their framing and fabrication. Alternative methods and materials can be used where justified by engineering analysis and testing. In all cases, the provisions of Section 2304 apply to all elements of wood frame construction.

## SECTION 2301 GENERAL

2301.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the materials, design, construction and quality of wood members and their fasteners.

Section 2301 includes specifications for use of and standards for production of wood and wood-based products such as boards, dimensional lumber and engineered wood products, such as I-joists, glued laminated timber, structural panels, trusses, particleboard, fiberboard and hardboard. Also included are criteria and specifications for the use of other materials, such as connectors used in conjunction with wood or wood-based products. Other chapters of the code also affect the use of wood materials in buildings and should be referenced prior to making final decisions on the use of any product.

The scope of this chapter is established in Section 2301.1, and broadly encompasses wood products and the limitations placed on them and their various applications within the code.

2301.2 Nominal sizes. For the purposes of this chapter, where dimensions of lumber are specified, they shall be deemed to be nominal dimensions unless specifically designated as actual dimensions (see Section 2304.2).

The use of nominal sizes for lumber is part of the traditional nomenclature for grading and identification of manufactured pieces. "Nominal" simply refers to the short-hand term such as "2 × 4" when the actual piece of lumber has a real dimension of 40 mm by 90 mm not 50 mm by 100 mm. Section 2304.2, however, prescribes that in determining the required size for design purposes, computations must be based on the actual size, rather than the nominal size, of the lumber.

## SECTION 2302 DESIGN
REQUIREMENTS

2302.1 General. The design of structural elements or systems, constructed partially or wholly of wood or wood-based products, shall be in accordance with one of the following methods:

1 Allowable stress design in accordance with Sections 2304, 2305 and 2306.

2 Load and resistance factor design in accordance with Sections 2304, 2305 and 2307.

3 Conventional light-frame construction in accordance with Sections 2304 and 2308.

4 AWC WFCM in accordance with Section 2309.

5 The design and construction of log structures in accordance with the provisions of ICC 400.

This chapter includes three methods of designing with wood or wood-based products. This section limits designs to one of these three methods unless an alternative method has been proven to be acceptable as permitted in Section 104.11. It is not uncommon for only one element of a structure to require engineered design. This section recognizes "partial" design.

## SECTION 2303 MINIMUM STANDARDS AND QUALITY

2303.1 General. Structural sawn lumber; end-jointed lumber; prefabricated wood I-joists; structural glued-laminated timber; wood structural panels; fiberboard sheathing (where used structurally); hardwood siding (where used structurally); particleboard; preservative-treated wood; structural log members; structural composite lumber; round timber poles and piles; fire-retard-treated wood; hardwood plywood; wood trusses; joist hangers; nails; and staples shall conform to the applicable provisions of this section.

Where the components of a wood structure comply with the various standards listed in Section 2303, a building or structure is deemed to comply with the minimum standards of quality prescribed by the code. Together, this section, the construction requirements of Section 2304 and the design standards referenced in Sections 2305 and 2306 contain most of the information needed to adequately design a structure. For engineered structures, it is necessary for the designer to have a working knowledge of engineering principles and experience with construction to properly

===== Page 1690 =====
interpret the recommendations and meet the provisions of other applicable sections of the code. For conventional wood-frame structures, the standards in Section 2303 combined with the construction requirements of Section 2304 and the prescriptive construction provisions in Section 2308 can be used to construct code-compliny wood-frame buildings.

Section 2303.1 lists the various materials that have production and quality control standards. The section covers minimum standards of quality for sawn lumber; end-jointed lumber; wood I-joists; glued-laminated timber; wood structural panels; fiberboard sheathing; hardboard siding; particleboard; preservative-treated wood; log members; composite lumber; round timber poles and piles; fire-retardant-treated wood; hardwood plywood; wood trusses; joist hangers; and nails and staples. The use of these standards is fundamental for manufacturers in producing products and maintaining quality control procedures. Designers, owners and building officials must understand these standards and the methods prescribed in them to be able to properly identify products that have been produced in accordance with their criteria. Without the knowledge that the various products and components meet the applicable standards, there is little assurance that a safe and efficient building or structure will be constructed.

2303.1.1 Sawl lumber. Sawl lumber used for load-supporting purposes, including end-jointed or edge-glued lumber, machine stress-rated or machine-evaluated lumber, shall be identified by the grade mark of a lumber grading or inspection agency that has been approved by an accreditation body that complies with DOC PS 20 or equivalent. Grading practices and identification shall comply with rules published by an agency approved in accordance with the procedures of DOC PS 20 or equivalent procedures.

All lumber used to support loads in a building or structure is required to be properly identified. Every species and grade of lumber has a unique inherent strength value. These values are further modified in sawn timber by the presence of growth characteristics that vary from piece to piece, such as knots, slope of grain, checks, etc. Without adequate identification, it would be impossible to verify that the proper material is being used in the field. The required grade mark must identify the species or species grouping: grade and moisture content at the time of surfacing; the grading agency; and the mill name or grader's number. Figure 2303.1.1 illustrates typical grade mark labels.
2303.1.1.1 Certificate of inspection. In lieu of a grade mark on the material, a certificate of inspection as to species and grade issued by a lumber grading or inspection agency meeting the requirements of this section is permitted to be accepted for precut, remanufactured or rough-sawn lumber and for sizes larger than 75 mm nominal thickness.

Design values are published by lumber grade rules-writing agencies for both individual and grouped species. A grouped species is lumber that is cut and marketed in lots containing two or more species, such as Spruce-Pine-Fir. These species grow together in large areas. It is more economical to market the lumber as a species group than attempt segregation. The assigned strength values include those applicable to the weaker species in the group. The code also allows certain types of structural lumber to have a certificate of inspection instead of a grade mark. A certificate of inspection is acceptable for precut, remanufactured or rough-sawn lumber and for sizes larger than 75 mm nominal in thickness. It is industry practice to place only one label (grade mark) on a piece of lumber, which may be removed on precut and remanufactured lumber. Each piece of lumber is graded after it has been cut to a standard size. The grade of the piece is determined based on its size, number and location of strength-reducing characteristics; therefore, one log may produce lumber of two or more different grades.

It is also industry practice not to label lumber having a nominal thickness larger than 75 mm, or rough-sawn material where the label may be illegible. A certificate of inspection from an approved agency is acceptable instead of the label for these types of lumber. The certificate should be filed with the permanent records of the building or structure.

If defects exceeding those permitted for the allegedly installed grade are visible, then a grader would be able to determine that the wood is definitely not of a suitable grade. To determine if the wood in question is definitely of a suitable grade, the grader must inspect all four faces of the piece. This cannot happen once the lumber is installed in the building, as other components of the building will be covering up some of the faces of the pieces.

2303.1.1.2 End-jointed lumber. Approved end-jointed lumber is permitted to be used interchangeably with solid-sawn members of the same species and grade. End-jointed lumber used in an assembly required to have a fire-resistance rating shall have the designation “Heat Resistant Adhesive” or “HRA” included in its grade mark.

===== Page 1691 =====
End-joined or edge-glued lumber is acceptable when identified by an appropriate grade mark. Section 4.1.6 of the ANSI/AWC NDS permits the use of such lumber for light framing, studs, joists, planks and decking. Where finger-jointed lumber is marked "Stud Use Only," then it is limited to applications where bending or tension stresses are subjected to short-term loading only. Where end-jointed lumber is used in fire-resistant-rated assemblies, it must be joined with heat-resistant adhesive and must be indicated on the grade stamp.

2303.1.2 Prefabricated wood I-joists. Structural capacities and design provisions for prefabricated wood I-joists shall be established and monitored in accordance with ASTM D5055.

This section specifies that the shear, moment and stiffness capacities of prefabricated wood I-joists be established and monitored by ASTM D5055. This standard also specifies that application details, such as bearing length and web openings, are to be considered in determining structural capacity. Wood I joists are structural members, typically used in floor and roof construction, manufactured out of sawn or structural composite lumber flanges and structural panel webs, bonded together with exterior adhesives forming an "I" cross section (see definition of "Prefabricated wood I-joist" in Section 202). The standard requires I-joist manufacturers to employ an independent inspection agency to monitor the procedures for quality assurance. Finally, the standard specifies that proper installation instructions accompany the product to the job site. The instructions are required to address weather protection, handling requirements and, where required, web reinforcement, connection details, lateral support, bearing details, web hole-cutting limitations and any special situation.

2303.1.3 Structural glued-laminated timber. Glued-laminated timbers shall be manufactured and identified as required in ANSI/AITC A 190.1 and ASTM D3737.

Glued-laminated timbers are required by this section to be manufactured following ANSI/APA A190.1 and ASTM D3737 for procedures to establish allowable structural properties. Knowing the standards these products must meet makes it easier to determine whether the product found in the field will meet the design requirements.

2303.1.4 Structural glued cross-laminated timber. Cross-laminated timbers shall be manufactured and identified in accordance with ANSI/APA PRG 320.

Cross-laminated timber was first developed in Europe, where it has been used extensively. In North America, ANSI/APA PRG 320 provides a consensus manufacturing standard for cross-laminated timber.

2303.1.5 Wood structural panels. Wood structural panels, where used structurally (including those used for siding, roof and wall sheathing, subflooring, diaphragms and built-up members), shall conform to the requirements for their type in DOC PS 1, DOC PS 2 or ANSI/APA PRP 210. Each panel or member shall be identified for grade, bond classification, and Performance Category by the trademarks of an approved testing and grading agency. The Performance Category value shall be used as the "nominal panel thickness" or "panel thickness" whenever referenced in this code. Wood structural panel components shall be designed and fabricated in accordance with the applicable standards listed in Section 2306.1 and identified by the trademarks of an approved testing and inspection agency indicating conformance to the applicable standard. In addition, wood structural panels where permanently exposed in outdoor applications shall be of Exterior type, except that wood structural panel roof sheathing exposed to the outdoors on the underside is permitted to be Exposure 1 type.

“Wood structural panels” is a collective term referring to plywood, oriented strand board (OSB) and other composite panels of wood-based materials (see definition of “Wood structural panel” in Chapter 2). ANSI/APA PRP-210 provides requirements and test methods for qualification and quality assurance for performance-rated engineered wood siding intended for use in construction applications as exterior siding. Identification of grade for plywood includes N, A, B, C Plugged, C and D (from no knots or patches to large knots and knotholes).

Plywood is manufactured with an odd number of layers that have their grain direction placed perpendicular to each other and are bonded together with a strong adhesive. Each individual layer may consist of an assembly of several different plies laminated together with their grains running in the same direction. Alternating the grain direction in successive layers gives a plywood panel dimensional stability across its width. Stamped on top of most panels is a span rating that indicates the maximum roof and floor joint spacings that can be accommodated. Additionally, an exposure rating is assigned as Exterior (designed for applications subject to permanent exposure to the weather or moisture), Exposure 1 (designed for applications where long construction delays may be expected prior to providing protection against moisture or

===== Page 1692 =====
weather extremes) or Exposure 2 (intended solely for protected construction applications where only moderate delays in providing protection from moisture are expected).

APA-rated Stud-I-floor panels are commonly used for thicker sheathing applications where added stiffness is desired. This type of panel has a single span rating, indicating that it is specifically engineered for floors, as the name would suggest. Adjoining panel edges may be blocked or may be ordered as tongue and groove, which provides added stability in an unblocked diaphragm. If a diaphragm has the necessary load capacity without the addition of blocking at all panel edges, such a specification can lower installation costs and decrease framing mistakes.

2303.1.6 Fiberboard. Fiberboard for its various uses shall conform to ASTM C 208. Fiberboard sheathing, where used structurally, shall be identified by an approved agency as conforming to ASTM C 208.

All fiberboard must meet the requirements of ASTM C 208, as well as being vermin proof, resistant to rot producing fungi and water repellent. This standard gives physical requirements for construction grades of fiberboard, including sheathing grade and roof insulating grade. The sheathing grade of fiberboard is further broken down into regular and intermediate densities.

2303.1.6.1 Jointing. To ensure tight-fitting assemblies, edges shall be manufactured with square, ship lapped, beveled, tongue-and-groove or U-shaped joints.

Tight-fitting joints in the fiberboard are required for all applications, including insulation, siding and wall sheathing.

2303.1.6.2 Roof insulation. Where used as roof insulation in all types of construction, fiberboard shall be protected with an approved roof covering.

Fiberboard is not intended for prolonged exposure to sunlight, wind or rain. Where fiberboard is used as roof insulation, it must be protected with an approved roof covering to prevent water saturation and subsequent delamination and to avoid decay and destruction of the glue bond by moisture.

2303.1.6.3 Wall insulation. Where installed and fire blocked to comply with Chapter 7, fiberboards are permitted as wall insulation in all types of construction. In fire walls and fire barriers, unless treated to comply with Section 803.1 for Class A materials, the boards shall be cemented directly to the concrete, masonry or other noncombustible base and shall be protected with an approved noncombustible veneer anchored to the base without intervening airspaces.

Fiberboard is permitted without any fire-resistance treatment in the walls of all types of construction (see Section 603.1). Where used in fire walls and fire barrier walls, fiberboard must be either treated to comply with Class A flame spread or adhered directly to a noncombustible base and protected by a tight-fitting, noncombustible veneer that is fastened through the fiberboard to the base. This is intended to prevent the fiberboard from contributing to the spread of fire.

2303.1.6.3.1 Protection. Fiberboard wall insulation applied on the exterior of foundation walls shall be protected below ground level with a bituminous coating.

Fiberboard insulation applied to the exterior side of foundation walls is required to be protected from the weather to improve its service life and maintain its performance characteristics. Of particular concern is foundation insulation that is in close proximity to grade and has the risk of being damaged by a lawn mower; rocks or soil kicked up against it; water from a garden hose; rainwater splash back; etc. Protection is required for all fiberboard insulation on the exterior face of foundation walls.

2303.1.7 Hardboard. Hardboard siding shall conform to the requirements of ANSI A135.6 and, where used structurally shall be identified by the label of an approved agency. Hardboard underlayment shall meet the strength requirements of 5.5 mm or 6.5 mm service class hardboard planed or sanded on one side to a uniform thickness of not less than 5.0 mm. Prefinished hardboard paneling shall meet the requirements of ANSI A135.5. Other basic hardboard products shall meet the requirements of ANSI A135.4. Hardboard products shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations.

Hardboard siding that is to be used structurally must be manufactured in accordance with CPA/ANSI A135.6 and marked to indicate conformance with the standard, whether primed or unprimed, and to identify the producer and the type, either lap or panel. Hardboard products are produced primarily from interfelted lignocellulosic fibers. There are five classes based on strength values. Underlayments are limited to 5.5 mm or 6.5 mm service class.

Prefinished hardboard is required to be manufactured to the CPA/ANSI A135.5 standard and must be marked to indicate the standard and to identify the producer, flame spread index, finish class, type of gloss and

===== Page 1693 =====
type of substrate, or must be accompanied by written certification of the same information.

2303.1.8 Particleboard. Particleboard shall conform to ANSI A208.1. Particleboard shall be identified by the grade mark or certificate of inspection issued by an approved agency. Particleboard shall not be utilized for applications other than indicated in this section unless the particleboard complies with the provisions of Section 2306.3.

Sponsored by the Composite Panel Association (CPA), ANSI A208.1 is the basic specification for the manufacture of particleboard, which establishes a system of marks for the boards' grade, density, and strength.

Particleboard used in construction is medium density and is first designated by an "M." The second digit or letter in the designation is related to grade. The designations range from 1 to 3, with 3 being the strongest. Grade M-S refers to medium density, "special grade" particleboard. This grade was added to ANSI A208.1 after the M-1, M-2 and M-3 grades had been established. Grade M-S falls between M-1 and M-2 in physical properties.

An optional third part of the grade designation indicates that the particleboard has a special characteristic. The grades of particleboard specified in Table 2306.5, M-S and M-2 "Exterior Glue," are manufactured with exterior glue to increase their durability characteristics. While ANSI A208.1 has provisions for Grade M-3 particleboard, panels that meet the requirements of this higher grade are more commonly evaluated and used as wood structural panels, commonly referred to as oriented strand board, in accordance with DOC PS-2. Therefore, Grade M-3 material is not addressed in Table 2306.5.

2303.1.8.1 Floor underlayment. Particleboard floor under layer shall conform to Type PBU of ANSI A208.1. Type PBU underlayment shall not be less than 6.5 mm thick and shall be installed in accordance with the instructions of the Composite Panel Association.

Although similar to medium density, Grade 1 particleboard—particleboard intended for use as floor under layerment—is designated "PBU" and has stricter limits on levels of formaldehyde emission permitted than those placed on Grade "M" particleboard. Particleboard intended for use as floor underlayment is not commonly manufactured with exterior glue, which could emit higher levels of formaldehyde than that permitted by ANSI A208.1 for Grade "PBU" floor underlayment.

Particleboard underlayment is often applied over a structural subfloor to provide a smooth surface for resilient-finish or textile floor coverings. The minimum 6.5 mm thickness is applicable over panel-type subflooring. Particleboard underlayment installed overboard or deck subflooring that has multiple joints should have a thickness of 9.5 mm. Joints in the underlayment should not be over joints in the subflooring.

All particleboard underlayment with thicknesses of through 6.5 through 19.0 mm should be attached with a minimum of 6d annular threaded nails spaced 150 mm o.c. on the edges and 250 mm o.c. for intermediate supports.

2303.1.9 Preservative-treated wood. Lumber, timber, plywood, piles and poles supporting permanent structures required by Section 2304.12 to be preservative treated shall conform to AWPA U1 and M4. Lumber and plywood used in permanent wood foundation systems shall conform to SBC 303.

Wood is able to absorb chemicals because of its cellular characteristics. Preservative treatment procedures that will repel termites and destroy decay causing fungus utilize this capability. The process includes placing wood in a large cylinder and applying a vacuum to remove as much air as possible from the wood. The chemical solution is then introduced, and pressure is applied to force the solution into the wood. The pressure is maintained until the desired absorption is obtained. A final vacuum is often applied to remove as much excess preservative as possible.

There are several variations of this basic process, all of which must provide the required retention of preservatives. AWPA U1, Section 4, prescribes the requirements for the preservatives that are used, while AWPA U1 specifies the minimum results of the treatment process based on a commodity specification and use category. These requirements include the depth of penetration of the chemical into the wood, and the amount of chemical retained by the wood once the process is completed. Additional requirements for wood used in foundation systems are given in SBC 303.

2303.1.9.1 Identification. Wood required by Section 2304.12 to be preservative treated shall bear the quality mark of an inspection agency that maintains continuing supervision, testing and inspection over the quality of the preservative-treated wood. Inspection agencies for preservative treated wood shall be listed by an accreditation body that complies with the requirements of the American Lumber Standards Treated Wood Program, or equivalent. The quality mark shall be on a stamp or label affixed to the preservative

===== Page 1694 =====
treated wood, and shall include the following information:

1 Identification of treating manufacturer.

2 Type of preservative used.

3 Minimum preservative retention (pcf).

4 End use for which the product is treated.

5 AWPA standard to which the product was treated.

6 Identity of the accredited inspection agency.

Quality marks are necessary to determine that preservative-treated wood conforms to applicable standards. The identifying mark must be by an approved inspection agency that has continuous follow-up services. Additionally, the inspection agency must be listed and certified as being competent by an approved organization. The American Lumber Standards Committee (ALSC) provides certification of treating agencies. Facsimiles of its quality marks are available by contacting the ALSC. The required quality mark is not a substitute for a grade mark. When wood or wood-based materials are being used structurally, both the quality mark and grade mark must be displayed on the piece.

2303.1.9.2 Moisture content. Where preservative-treated wood is used in enclosed locations where drying in service cannot readily occur, such wood shall be at a moisture content of 19 percent or less before being covered with insulation, interior wall finish, floor covering or other materials.

Water-borne preservatives are subject to leaching unless properly dried and protected. The requirement for reducing the moisture content to 19 percent or less is intended to aid in preventing such leaching. Also, all structural members are presumed to have a moisture content of 19 percent or less.

Preservative treatment does not require any adjustment of design values. Some species have a high surface tension, which means that it is difficult to penetrate the surface of the lumber. These species are often incised to break the surface tension and allow the chemicals to penetrate the member. Incising requires a reduction in the design values for the member.

2303.1.10 Structural composite lumber. Structural capacities for structural composite lumber shall be established and monitored in accordance with ASTM D5456.

The purpose of this section is to specify the appropriate standard for establishing structural capacities of structural composite lumber. Included within the standard are criteria for laminated veneer lumber and parallel strand lumber. The ASTM International (ASTM) standard includes requirements for testing, criteria for determining allowable stresses, requirements for independent inspection and quality assurance procedures (also see definition of "Structural composite lumber" in Chapter 2).

2303.1.11 Structural log members. Stress grading of structural log members of nonrectangular shape, as typically used in log buildings, shall be in accordance with ASTM D3957. Such structural log members shall be identified by the grade mark of an approved lumber grading or inspection agency. In lieu of a grade mark on the material, a certificate of inspection as to species and grade issued by a lumber grading or inspection agency meeting the requirements of this section shall be permitted.

This section addresses grading requirements for logs used as structural members by referencing ASTM D3957 methods for establishing structural capacities of logs. It also specifies the requirement for a grading stamp or an alternative certification on structural logs.

2303.1.12 Round timber poles and piles. Round timber poles and piles shall comply with ASTM D3200 and ASTM D25, respectively.

This section provides references to the appropriate material standards for round timber poles and piles.

2303.1.13 Engineered wood rim board. Engineered wood rim boards shall conform to ANSI/APA PRR 410 or shall be evaluated in accordance with ASTM D7672. Structural capacities shall be in accordance with ANSI/APA PRR 410 or established in accordance with ASTM D7672. Rim boards conforming to ANSI/APA PRR 410 shall be marked in accordance with that standard.

Engineered rim board serves as a key structural element in wood floor construction where structural load path through the perimeter member and dimensional change compatibility are design considerations. Both ANSI/APA PRR 410 and ASTM D7672 address the fundamental requirements for the testing and evaluation of engineered rim board. PRR 410 also includes performance categories for engineered wood products used in engineered rim board applications. Under PRR 410, products are assigned a grade based on performance category (i.e., categories based on structural capacity) and will bear a mark in accordance with the grade. In contrast, ASTM D7672 is applicable for determination of product-specific rim board performance (i.e., structural capacities) for engineered wood products that may be recognized in

===== Page 1695 =====
manufacturer's literature or product evaluation reports.

2303.2 Fire-retardant-treated wood. Fire-retardant-treated wood is any wood product that, when impregnated with chemicals by a pressure process or other means during manufacture, shall have, when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723, a listed flame spread index of 25 or less. Additionally, the ASTM E84 or UL 723 test shall be continued for a 20-minute period and the flame front shall not progress more than 3.2 m beyond the centerline of the burners at any time during the test.

Fire-retardant-treated wood is plywood and lumber that has been pressure impregnated with chemicals to improve its flame spread characteristics beyond that of untreated wood. Since fire-retardant-treated wood is allowed in some applications where noncombustible materials are otherwise required, it is important that these products meet rigorous requirements.

The result of impregnating wood with fire-retardant chemicals is a chemical reaction at certain temperature ranges. This reaction reduces the release of certain intermediate products that contribute to the flaming of wood, and also results in the formation of a greater percentage of charcoal and water. Some chemicals are also effective in reducing the oxidation rate for charcoal residue. Fire-retardant chemicals also reduce the heat release rate of fire-retardant-treated wood when burning over a wide range of temperatures. This section gives provisions for the treatment and use of fire-retardant-treated wood.

2303.2.1 Pressure process. For wood products impregnated with chemicals by a pressure process, the process shall be performed in closed vessels under pressures not less than 350 kPa.

This section elaborates on the requirements of treatment using a pressure process and specifies a minimum pressure of 350 kPa.

2303.2.2 Other means during manufacture. For wood products impregnated with chemicals by other means during manufacture, the treatment shall be an integral part of the manufacturing process of the wood product. The treatment shall provide permanent protection to all surfaces of the wood product. The use of paints, coating, stains or other surface treatments is not an approved method of protection as required in this section.

This section elaborates on the requirements of treatment using other means during manufacture and requires treatment to be an integral part of the manufacturing process.
2303.2.3 Fire testing of wood structural panels. Wood structural panels shall be tested with a ripped or cut longitudinal gap of 3.2 mm.

The 3.2 mm gap is representative of how the product is installed and used in the field.

2303.2.4 Labeling. In addition to the labels required in Section 2303.1.1 for sawn lumber and Section 2303.1.5 for wood structural panels, each piece of fire-retardant treated lumber and wood structural panels shall be labeled. The label shall contain the following items:

1 The identification mark of an approved agency in accordance with Section 1703.5.

2 Identification of the treating manufacturer.

3 The name of the fire-retardant treatment.

4 The species of wood treated.

5 Flame spread and smoke-developed index.

6 Method of drying after treatment.

7 Conformance with appropriate standards in accordance with Sections 2303.2.5 through 2303.2.8.

8 For fire-retardant-treated wood exposed to weather, damp or wet locations, include the words “No increase in the listed classification when subjected to the Standard Rain Test” (ASTM D2898).

For continued quality, each piece of fire-retardant-treated wood must be identified by an approved agency having a re-inspection service. The identification must show the performance rating of the material, including the 30-minute ASTM E84 test results determined in Section 2303.2, and the design adjustment values determined in Section 2303.2.5. The third-party agency that provides the fire-retardant-treated wood label is also required to state on the label that the fire-retardant-treated wood complies with the requirements of Section 2303.2, and that design adjustment values have been determined for the fire-retardant-treated wood in compliance with the provisions of Section 2303.2.5. The fire-retardant-treated wood label must be distinct from the grading label to avoid confusing the two. The grading label provides information about the properties of wood before it is pressure treated with fire-retardant chemicals. The label provides properties of the wood after fire-retardant-treated wood treatment. It is imperative that the fire-retardant-treated wood label be presented in such a manner that it complements the grading label, and does not create confusion over which label takes precedence.

2303.2.5 Strength adjustments. Design values for untreated lumber and wood structural panels, as specified in Section 2303.1, shall be

===== Page 1696 =====
adjusted for fire-retardant-treated wood. Adjustments to design values shall be based on an approved method of investigation that takes into consideration the effects of the anticipated temperature and humidity to which the fire-retardant-treated wood will be subjected, the type of treatment and re-drying procedures.

Experience has shown that certain factors can affect the physical properties of fire-retardant-treated wood. Among these factors are the pressure treatment and redrying process and the extremes of temperature and humidity that the fire-retardant-treated wood will be subjected to once it is installed. The design values for all fire-retardant-treated wood must be adjusted for the effects of the treatment and environmental conditions, such as high temperature and humidity in attic installations. This section requires the determination of these design adjustment values, based on an investigation procedure that includes subjecting the fire-retardant-treated wood to similar temperatures and humidities and approval by the building official. The tested fire-retardant-treated wood must be identical to that which is produced. Items to be considered by the building official reviewing the test procedure include species and grade of the untreated wood and conditioning of wood, such as drying before the fire-retardant treatment process. A fireretardant wood treater may choose to have its treatment process evaluated by model code evaluation services. The fire-retardant-treated wood is required by Section 2303.2.1 to be labeled with the design adjustment values. These can take the form of factors that are multiplied by the original design values of the untreated wood to determine its allowable stresses, or new allowable stresses can be used that have already been factored down in consideration of the fire-retardant treatment.

2303.2.5.1 Wood structural panels. The effect of treatment and the method of re-drying after treatment, and exposure to high temperatures and high humidity on the flexure properties of fire-retardant-treated softwood plywood shall be determined in accordance with ASTM D5516. The test data developed by ASTM D5516 shall be used to develop adjustment factors, maximum loads and spans, or both, for untreated plywood design values in accordance with ASTM D 6305. Each manufacturer shall publish the allowable maximum loads and spans for service as floor and roof sheathing for its treatment.

This section references the test standard developed to evaluate the flexural properties of fire-retardant-treated plywood that is exposed to high temperatures. Note that while the section title refers to wood structural panels, the referenced standard is limited to softwood plywood. Therefore, judgment is required in determining the effects of elevated temperature and humidity on other types of wood structural panels. Each product manufacturer is required to publish the allowable maximum loads and spans for floor and roof sheathing for the particular type of treatment.

2303.2.5.2 Lumber. For each species of wood that is treated, the effects of the treatment, the method of redrying after treatment and exposure to high temperatures and high humidities on the allowable design properties of fire-retardant-treated lumber shall be determined in accordance with ASTM D5664. The test data developed by ASTM D 5664 shall be used to develop modification factors for use at or near room temperature and at elevated temperatures and humidity in accordance with ASTM D6841. Each manufacturer shall publish the modification factors for service at temperatures of not less than  \( 27^{\circ} \) C and for roof framing. The roof framing modification factors shall take into consideration the climatological location.

This section references the test standard developed to determine the necessary adjustments to design values for lumber that has been fire-retardant treated and includes the effects of elevated temperatures. Each lumber manufacturer is required to publish the modification factors to design values.

2303.2.6 Exposure to weather, damp or wet locations. Where fire-retardant-treated wood is exposed to weather, or damp or wet locations, it shall be identified as “Exterior” to indicate there is no increase in the listed flame spread index as defined in Section 2303.2 when subjected to ASTM D2898.

Some fire-retardant treatments are soluble when exposed to the weather or used under high-humidity conditions. Note that the humidity threshold established for interior applications in Section 2303.2.7 is 92 percent. Therefore, fire-retardant-treated wood used in an interior location that will exceed this threshold should comply with this section. When a fire-retardant-treated wood product is to be exposed to any of the conditions noted in this section, it must be further tested in accordance with ASTM D2898. Testing requires the material to meet the performance criteria listed in Section 2303.2. The material is then subjected to the ASTM weathering test and retested after drying. There must not be

===== Page 1697 =====
any significant differences in the performance recorded before and after the weathering test.

2303.2.7 Interior applications. Interior fire-retardant treated wood shall have moisture content of not over 28 percent when tested in accordance with ASTM D3201 procedures at 92-percent relative humidity. Interior fire-retardant treated wood shall be tested in accordance with Section 2303.2.5.1 or 2303.2.5.2. Interior fire-retardant-treated wood designated as Type A shall be tested in accordance with the provisions of this section.

The environment in which the fire-retardant-treated wood is used can affect its performance. In order to make sure that the performance will be adequate in a humid interior condition, testing in accordance with ASTM D3201 as well as that specified in Section 2303.2.5.1 or 2303.2.5.2 is required for all interior wood. Requiring all interior wood to be tested for the effects of high temperature and humidity reduces the chance of premature failure due to improper use of fire-retardant-treated wood.

2303.2.8 Moisture content. Fire-retardant-treated wood shall be dried to a moisture content of 19 percent or less for lumber and 15 percent or less for wood structural panels before use. For wood kiln-dried after treatment (KDAT), the kiln temperatures shall not exceed those used in kiln drying the lumber and plywood submitted for the tests described in Section 2303.2.5.1 for plywood and 2303.2.5.2 for lumber.

These moisture-content thresholds are necessary to prevent leaching of the fire retardant from the wood. Section 2303.2.5 requires that the strength adjustments consider the redrying procedure, and this section clarifies that the drying temperatures for wood kiln dried after treatment must be consistent with those on which the adjustment factors were based.

2303.2.9 Type I and II construction applications. See Section 603.1 for limitations on the use of fire-retardant-treated wood in buildings of Type I or II construction.

Although Type I and II construction typically would only allow noncombustible materials, Section 603.1 allows various parts of a building to be combustible. Specifically, there are 22 items listed that are exceptions to the strict limits on Types I and II construction. There are three conditions listed in that section that will allow fire-retardant-treated wood to be used: in nonbearing partitions where their fire resistance is 2 hours or less; in nonbearing exteriors that do not require a fire-resistance rating; and in roof construction of buildings not over two stories high.

2303.3 Hardwood and plywood. Hardwood and decorative plywood shall be manufactured and identified as required in HPVA HP-1.

Hardwood and decorative plywood, like any other product that undergoes a change in the process of being configured for use in construction, has standard criteria for the manufacturing process and the quality of the materials that are to be used. HPVA HP-1 is the standard for hardwood and decorative plywood and is one of the family of standards for this type of product.

2303.4 Trusses. Wood trusses shall comply with Sections 2303.4.1 through 2303.4.7.

Trusses are engineered components. They can also be incorporated into a building of otherwise conventional light-frame construction. All types of trusses are included within these provisions, including those with parallel, pitched or curved chords; bowstring, sawtooth or camelback profiles; heavy-bolted timber or light-gage metal-plate-connected elements. Other trusses that are somewhat common in the industry include those with wood chords and metal tubular webs connected with bolts or pins.

2303.4.1 Design. Wood trusses shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of this code and accepted engineering practice. Members are permitted to be joined by nails, glue, bolts, timber connectors, metal connector plates or other approved framing devices.

Trusses generally consist of a top chord, web members and bottom chord. Under normal loading conditions the top chord is in compression and bending, the bottom chord is in tension and bending and the web members are in tension or compression. The complete design of trusses can be a complex process involving a variety of load combinations. The truss designer must keep the entire system in mind, as trusses do not typically exist as single members, but rather components that must work together to form a complete structural system. Truss designs should address required connections such as truss-to-truss (see Item 1 of Table 2304.10.2) and truss-to-wall plate (see Item 6 of Table 2304.10.2) since they are not covered in the fastening schedule provided by Table 2304.10.2. A variety of references are available to assist in the design of wood trusses, including the American Institute of Timber Construction (AITC) Timber Construction Manual and Structural Design in Wood. Helpful design resources are also available from industry associations such as the Structural Building Components.

===== Page 1698 =====
Association/Wood Truss Council of America (WTCA) and truss manufacturers, such as Mitek Industries and Alpine Engineered Products.

2303.4.1.1 Truss design drawings. The written, graphic and pictorial depiction of each individual truss shall be provided to the building official for approval prior to installation. Truss design drawings shall be provided with the shipment of trusses delivered to the job site. Truss design drawings shall include, at a minimum, the following information:

1 Slope or depth, span and spacing.

2 Location of all joints and support locations.

3 Number of plies if greater than one.

4 Required bearing widths.

5 Design loads as applicable, including:

5.1 Top chord live load.

5.2 Top chord dead load.

5.3 Bottom chord live load.

5.4 Bottom chord dead load.

5.5 Additional loads and locations.

5.6 Environmental design criteria and loads (such as wind, rain, seismic).

6 Other lateral loads, including drag strut loads.

7 Adjustments to wood member and metal connector plate design value for conditions of use.

8 Maximum reaction force and direction, including maximum uplift reaction forces where applicable.

9 Joint connection type and description, such as size and thickness or gage, and the dimensioned location of each joint connector except where symmetrically located relative to the joint interface.

10 Size, species and grade for each wood member.

11 Truss-to-truss connections and truss field assembly requirements.

12 Calculated span-to-deflection ratio and maximum vertical and horizontal deflection for live and total load as applicable.

13 Maximum axial tension and compression forces in the truss members.

14 Required permanent individual truss member restraint location and the method and details of restraint and diagonal bracing to be used in accordance with Section 2303.4.1.2.

Because engineered trusses are essential structural components of the building, the code requires truss drawings to be submitted to the building official for review and approval prior to installation. To be consistent regarding the specific information that is required to be included on truss drawings, the code lists 14 items that are to be included in order to effectively review and approve truss submittals. Engineers and contractors frequently depend on the fabricator to design the truss. Sometimes special supports or connections for trusses to the structure below may be required, such as at girder trusses or those needs say to resist high uplift forces, and the truss designer must coordinate these with the building designer. The truss engineer knows and understands how connectors can be applied to resist imposed forces and that knowledge is critical to providing an adequate design to transfer the forces to the supporting structure below. The building engineer can then use that information to properly complete the connection and provide a continuous load path to the foundation.

The majority of the items listed in this section are readily available from any truss designer. Since the documentation is required to be included with the submitted plans and the trusses delivered to the job site, the inspector should be able to readily verify that the field installation meets the intent of the truss engineer.

2303.4.1.2 Permanent individual truss member restraint (PITMR) and permanent individual truss member diagonal bracing (PITMDB). Where the truss design drawings designate the need for permanent individual truss member restraint, it shall be accomplished by one of the following methods:

1 PITMR and PITMDB installed using standard industry lateral restraint and diagonal bracing details in accordance with TPI 1, Section 2.3.3.1.1, accepted engineering practice, or Figure 2303.4.1.2(1), Figure 2303.4.1.2(3), and Figure 2303.4.1.2(5).

2 Individual truss member reinforcement in place of the specified lateral restraints (i.e., buckling reinforcement such as T-reinforcement, L-reinforcement, proprietary reinforcement, etc.) such that the buckling of any individual truss member is resisted internally by the individual truss. The buckling reinforcement of individual truss members shall be installed as shown on the truss design drawing, on supplemental truss member buckling reinforcement details provided by the truss designer or in accordance with Figure 2303.4.1.2(2), Figure 2303.4.1.2(3) and Figure 2303.4.1.2(4).

===== Page 1699 =====
3 A project specific PITMR and PITMDB design provided by any registered design professional.

This section emphasizes the need for permanent truss bracing to be installed and lists the options for permanent truss member bracing. All forms of lateral bracing are critical and are well described within common truss publications, such as SBCA/BCSI 2018, Guide to Good Practice for Handling, Installing, Restraining & Bracing of Metal Plate Connected Wood Trusses.

The truss designer provides engineering for the entire truss system, which includes the design of individual trusses, girder trusses, truss-to-truss connections and both temporary and permanent lateral bracing. In some cases, permanent lateral bracing applied to the webs or the bottom chord may require a connection to the building, such as at a balloon-framed wall, which would then require the involvement of the building designer. In these special cases, the truss designer and building engineers must work together to arrive at acceptable details that will fulfill the truss bracing requirements and also be compatible with both the truss system and the building system.

Permanent individual truss member restraint (PITMR) is used to prevent local buckling of an individual truss chord or web member because of the axial forces in the individual truss member. Permanent individual truss member diagonal bracing (PITMDB) is a structural member or assembly intended to permanently stabilize the PITMR.

See Figure 2303.4.1.2(1) to Figure 2303.4.1.2(5).

2303.4.1.2.1 Trusses installed without a diaphragm. Trusses installed without a diaphragm on the top or bottom chord shall require a project specific PITMR and PITMDB design prepared by a registered design professional.

Exception: Group U occupancies.

For specialty projects where there is no diagram on the top or bottom chords, a project specific PITMR and PITMDB design is required. For example, projects that have dropped ceilings and thus no ceiling diaphragm. An exception is provided for Group U occupancies.

2303.4.1.3 Trusses spanning 18 m or greater. The owner or the owner's authorized agent shall contract with any qualified registered design professional for the design of the temporary installation restraint and diagonal bracing and the PITMR and PITMDB for all trusses with clear spans 18 m or greater.
Due to their size, weight and potentially large support reactions, these longer span trusses pose greater stability concerns, making the proper design of the bracing, both temporary and permanent, a key safety measure.

2303.4.1.4 Truss designer. The individual or organization responsible for the design of trusses.

This section defines a term unique to this section, "truss designer." Truss design is a specialty, and the designer should be thoroughly familiar with member forces, connection capabilities and behavior as well as what is necessary to cause the entire truss system to function in a structurally sound fashion. Engineers and contractors often depend on the fabricator to design the truss. Sometimes special connections for trusses to the supporting structure may be required, such as those necessary to resist high uplift forces, and the truss designer must coordinate these with the building designer. The truss designer is familiar with the manner in which those connectors can be applied to the truss (i.e., to engage the whole section, attach only to the chord or attach only to the web). In some cases, the truss designer must work under the responsible charge of a registered design professional and the truss drawings must be stamped by such person (see Section 2303.4.1.4.1).

2303.4.1.4.1 Truss design drawings. Where required by the registered design professional, the building official or the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed, each individual truss design drawing shall bear the seal and signature of the truss designer.

Exceptions:

1. Where a cover sheet and truss index sheet are combined into a single sheet and attached to the set of truss design drawings, the single cover/truss index sheet is the only document required to be signed and sealed by the truss designer.

2. Where a cover sheet and a truss index sheet are separately provided and attached to the set of truss design drawings, the cover sheet and the truss index sheet are the only documents required to be signed and sealed by the truss designer.

In some cases, the truss drawings must be stamped by the registered design professional. The requirement for signing and sealing each truss design drawing, versus signing and sealing only a cover sheet or index sheet, is the recognized approach since it is often used in current construction practice.

===== Page 1700 =====
2303.4.2 Truss placement diagram. The truss manufacturer shall provide a truss placement diagram that identifies the proposed location for each individually designated truss and references the corresponding truss design drawing. The truss placement diagram shall be provided as part of the truss submittal package, and with the shipment of trusses delivered to the job site. Truss placement diagrams that serve only as a guide for installation and do not deviate from the permit submittal drawings shall not be required to bear the seal or signature of the truss designer.

This section describes and defines the term “truss placement diagram.” It is intended to minimize the confusion that exists in the construction industry between a variety of terms that are often used interchangeably, such as “installation documents,” “construction documents,” “shop drawings,” etc. The term “truss placement diagram” is preferred by the truss industry and is very specific. The section requires a truss placement diagram to identify the location of each truss and references the corresponding truss design drawing to facilitate inspection and proper installation.

2303.4.3 Truss submittal package. The truss submittal package provided by the truss manufacturer shall consist of each individual truss design drawing, the truss placement diagram, the permanent individual truss member restraint/bracing method and details and any other structural details germane to the trusses; and, as applicable, the cover/truss index sheet.

This section lists the minimum information that must be submitted to the building official by the truss manufacturer.

2303.4.4 Anchorage. The design for the transfer of loads and anchorage of each truss to the supporting structure is the responsibility of the registered design professional.

This section clarifies that the registered design professional is responsible for a design addressing load transfer and truss anchorage to the supporting structure.

2303.4.5 Alterations to trusses. Truss members and components shall not be cut, notched, drilled, spliced or otherwise altered in any way without written concurrence and approval of a registered design professional. Alterations resulting in the addition of loads to any member (for example, HVAC equipment, piping, additional roofing or insulation) shall not be permitted without verification that the truss is capable of supporting such additional loading.

In any structural member, the existence of holes or notches can affect its ability to resist design loads. The effects of any alterations on the capacity of truss members must be assessed by a registered design professional. This requirement applies not only to the truss chords and webs, but also to permanent lateral bracing components. Additionally, trusses are designed to carry a specific load and any loads that are added must be assessed by a registered design professional. The roof live load must also be considered in any review of existing trusses, as that live load also covers roofing operations that may take place in the future.

2303.4.6 TPI 1 specifications. In addition to Sections 2303.4.1 through 2303.4.5, the design, manufacture and quality assurance of metal-plate-connected wood trusses shall be in accordance with TPI 1. Job-site inspections shall be in compliance with Section 110.4, as applicable.

Metal-plate-connected wood trusses have been a popular product for the construction of wood-frame buildings for many years. There are significant benefits to building with these engineered systems of wood and metal connectors; however, there are also criteria associated with the design, manufacturing, transportation and placement of trusses that are critical to their proper use in a structure. TPI 1, National Design Standard for Metal-plate-connected Wood Truss Construction, is the industry-developed standard for managing this process. The standard establishes minimum requirements for the design and construction of metal-plate-connected wood trusses and describes the lumber and steel materials used and design procedures for truss members and joints. Responsibilities, methods for evaluating metal connector plates and truss manufacturing quality assurance are also contained in the standard.

The section also requires a truss manufacturer to have an agency review its operations to determine compliance with this standard. This type of evaluation by a qualified person is necessary to verify the quality of the product and its ability to perform as designed.

2303.4.7 Truss quality assurance. Trusses not part of a manufacturing process in accordance with either Section 2303.4.6 or a referenced standard, which provides requirements for quality control done under the supervision of a third-party quality control agency, shall be manufactured in compliance with Sections 1704.2.5 and 1705.5, as applicable.

✿ Trusses fabricated under the TPI 1 standard are subject to third-party supervision for quality assurance purposes. Likewise, trusses fabricated under other standards that are referenced in the code are generally subject to quality assurance by third-party supervision.

===== Page 1701 =====
Trusses that are not manufactured under such quality assurance processes require special inspection as required by Chapter 17. In this case, the section references Section 1704.2.5 for the inspection of fabricators and Section 1705.5 for special inspection of wood fabrication processes.

2303.5 Test standard for joist hangers. Joist hangers shall be in accordance with ASTM D7147.

* Metal joist hangers are very common in modern wood-frame construction. Testing requirements for joist hangers are included in ASTM D7147.

2303.6 Nails and staples. Nails and staples shall conform to requirements of ASTM F1667, including Supplement 1. Nails used for framing and sheathing connections shall have minimum average bending yield strengths as follows: 550 MPa for shank diameters larger than 4.50 mm but not larger than 6.5 mm, 620 MPa for shank diameters larger than 3.5 mm but not larger than 4.50 mm and 690 MPa for shank diameters of not less than 2.50 mm but not larger than 3.60 mm. Staples used for framing and sheathing connections shall have minimum average bending moments as follows: 3.6 0.40 N·m for No. 16 gage staples, 0.45 N·m for No. 15 gage staples, and 0.50 N·m for No. 14 gage staples.

The code specifies the material standard for driven nails and staples by reference to ASTM F1667, Specification for Driven Fasteners: Nails, Spikes and Staples. ASTM F1667 specifies dimensions, etc., for nails, spikes and staples. Minimum nail strengths are specified based on the stiffness of the nail shank. Minimum fastening is provided in the fastening schedule in Table 2304.10.2. ASTM F1667 Supplement 1 contains requirements for bending yield strength of nails, including test methods for same.

Just as the capacity of nailed connections is dependent on the stiffness of the nail shank, the capacity of stapled connections is dependent on the stiffness of the staple legs. Research was performed at Virginia Tech on stapled connections paralleling the research that was performed there on nailed connections. The research on nailed connections was incorporated into the ANSI/AWC NDS. The research on stapled connections has been incorporated into the ICC Evaluation Service (ICC-ES) Acceptance Criteria 201 for steel wire staples used to connect wood or metal elements into wood and wood-based materials. The determination of staple bending moments is in accordance with ASTM F1575 as well as the modifications of that standard that were made in Sections 3.5.1 through 3.5.4 of ICC ES Acceptance Criteria 201.

2303.7 Shrinkage. Consideration shall be given in design for the effects of wood cross-grain dimensional changes that occur as a result of changes in the wood moisture content after installation.

As their moisture content changes, wood members undergo cross-grain dimensional changes. Such changes in dimension occurring after installation should be considered in the design.

## SECTION 2304 GENERAL
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS

2304.1 General. The provisions of this section apply to design methods specified in Section 2302.1. This section is intended to provide some of the more important details of wood-framed construction and, as a result, provide consistency in building inspections. The methods of design are noted in Section 2302.1 and in the industry documents specified therein. Regardless of the design method chosen, the construction requirements of this section must be followed and enforced. In general, Section 2304 is related more to construction requirements than it is to design requirements.

Wood-framed construction has not changed much over the years, which is beneficial for a variety of reasons. First of all, many framers prefer doing things the way they've always done them in the past, most of which are detailed in carpentry manuals or architectural detailing books. To the extent such practices do not violate the need to support or transfer loads, it is preferable to allow them. Further, it is important to reach some type of agreement with these framers to help maintain a consistent product that a building inspector would be familiar with from building to building. This section helps to achieve this goal by having a consistent set of rules that apply to all wood-frame design methods.

2304.2 Size of structural members. Computations to determine the required sizes of members shall be based on the net dimensions (actual sizes) and not nominal sizes.

ASD and LRFD methods require the use of the actual lumber dimensions that occur after the wood has been surfaced and dried. Typically, dimension lumber will shrink 12.5 mm in thickness and 12.5 mm to 19 mm in face width as noted in the American Softwood Lumber (ASL) standard DOC PS 20. This provision is an attempt to make sure that if design principles are applied to a specific element, the designer uses values consistent with the actual net section properties and load-carrying

===== Page 1702 =====
capacity of the member, as reflected in the referenced design standards. Nominal sizes, standard dressed dimensions and section properties of (S4S) lumber and glued-laminated timber are given in the ANSI/AWC NDS Supplement.

2304.3 Wall framing. The framing of exterior and interior walls shall be in accordance with the provisions specified in Section 2308 unless a specific design is furnished.

The conventional construction criteria in Section 2308 provide great detail and specifications for the construction of typical stud-framed walls. Under the majority of circumstances, the methods and procedures for framing stud walls will provide the necessary resistance to conventional-level loads for a typical stud wall. Although special loading conditions would need to be considered in the design of nonconventional walls, the completed product will likely be similar in shape and form to an otherwise conventionally framed wall.

2304.3.1 Bottom plates. Studs shall have full bearing on a 50 mm-thick or larger plate or sill having a width at least equal to the width of the studs.

It is necessary to provide a continuous wood plate at the bottom of the wall with a minimum nominal thickness of 50 mm, so that the loads supported by the studs in a wood-framed wall are adequately transferred to the supporting structural members or foundation below. The plate is required to be at least the same width as the studs to achieve full bearing to ensure that the capacity of each stud is realized. This requirement is commonly known in the wood construction industry and will typically be met unless there is some type of problem in the field or such a condition occurs in existing construction. If the bottom plate of the wall is found to be narrower than the width of the studs for some reason, the structural issue that needs to be checked is the perpendicular to-grain bearing stress in that plate and axial load capacity of the stud. The ANSI/AWC NDS provides guidelines for calculating and checking these stresses.

2304.3.2 Framing over openings. Headers, double joists, trusses or other approved assemblies that are of adequate size to transfer loads to the vertical members shall be provided over window and door openings in load-bearing walls and partitions.

Stress in stud-framed walls needs to be continuous in order to carry the imposed loads from the top plate to the bottom plate and eventually to the foundation. Where there is an opening in the framed wall, this continuity is interrupted. It is necessary to transfer the loads from above the opening to adjacent structural members, which could be a single stud, multiple studs or a solid post. The loads above the opening are typically carried by a solid wood beam or header, a combination of cripple studs and plates or some other combination of members that provides the needed capacity to adequately span between the supporting studs on each side of the opening. An important structural consideration is the connection between the member spanning the opening and the supporting member. Whether that connection is a simple direct bearing support, a hanger or some other type, it is necessary to provide a mechanism that will transfer not only the vertical loads but also forces that occur perpendicular to the wall plane where such a consideration is warranted.

2304.3.3 Shrinkage. Wood walls and bearing partitions shall not support more than two floors and a roof unless an analysis satisfactory to the building official shows that shrinkage of the wood framing will not have adverse effects on the structure or any plumbing, electrical or mechanical systems or other equipment installed therein due to excessive shrinkage or differential movements caused by shrinkage. The analysis shall also show that the roof drainage system and the foregoing systems or equipment will not be adversely affected or, as an alternate, such systems shall be designed to accommodate the differential shrinkage or movements.

The adverse effects of wood shrinkage are greatest in multistory buildings having nonstructural components and supported equipment that may not be able to tolerate significant differential movements caused by shrinkage. This section states conditions under which shrinkage of the wood framing must be considered in the construction of wood-framed wall systems. An analysis of this phenomenon is required in order to determine the effect of shrinkage on the building system that is supported by the wall below. A typical wood-framed building will be constructed of mostly dry lumber, which has a moisture content of 19 percent or less. When the supply of dry lumber is limited, the contractor may need to use green lumber, which has a moisture content greater than 19 percent. The overall effect of lumber shrinkage on a multistory wood-framed building is described in AWC, Allowable Stress Design Manual for Wood Construction Design of Wood Structures—ASD. Another example of the adverse effects of shrinkage is the impact it can have on shear wall performance. Shrinkage has been recognized as a factor in loose hold-down anchor bolt nuts in

===== Page 1703 =====
earthquake-damaged buildings. In this situation, the hold-down cannot resist tension until the slack is taken up, resulting in excessive movement of the shear wall under lateral loading. Since in most cases the shear wall sheathing conceals the hold-downs, this problem often goes undetected. Additional slippage or looseness due to wood shrinkage can also contribute to the overall wall lateral displacement, which results in more story drift than expected. This is especially the case for narrow shear walls (i.e., shear walls with a height-to-width ratio more than 1:1), since the variable da in Equation 23-2 plays a larger role in the lateral displacement of such walls based upon wall geometry.

2304.4 Floor and roof framing. The framing of wood joisted floors and wood-framed roofs shall be in accordance with the provisions specified in Section 2308 unless a specific design is furnished.

Similar to the criteria for stud wall construction, floors may be constructed using the conventional construction methods prescribed in Section 2308, subject to the limitations described therein. One such limitation is a restriction on the magnitude of the dead and live that may be applied to the members described in the rafter span tables.

2304.5 Framing around flues and chimneys. Combustible framing shall be not less than 50 mm but shall be not less than the distance specified in Sections 2111 and 2113 and SBC 501, from flues, chimneys and fireplaces, and 150 mm away from flue openings.

This provision is duplicated in SBC 501 but must be included in both places in order to alert the framer, installer and inspector to the requirement. Where exposed to heat for a prolonged period of time, the characteristics of wood may change. In particular, the temperature at which wood will ignite can be lowered. Repeated exposure to temperature extremes has a cumulative effect on the mechanical properties of wood, whereby sustained heating at temperatures above  \( 100^{\circ} \) C may cause negative nonreversible effects on these properties. In order to help mitigate this phenomenon, a separation is provided so that the wood will not be directly exposed or noncombustible firestopping material is placed between the wood and the heat source. Some type of separation has been required in legacy model codes and is detailed in commonly used construction manuals.

2304.6 Exterior wall sheathing. Wall sheathing on the outside of exterior walls, including gables, and the connection of the sheathing to framing shall be designed in accordance with the general provisions of this code and shall be capable of resisting wind pressures in accordance with Section 1609.

This section establishes structural performance requirements and clarifies that wall sheathing that is on the outside of exterior walls, as well as the connection of the sheathing to the framing, must be capable of resisting wind pressures that are determined in Section 1609. It also calls attention to the fact that the required wind resistance applies to the gable.

2304.6.1 Wood structural panel sheathing. Where wood structural panel sheathing is used as the exposed finish on the outside of exterior walls, it shall have an exterior exposure durability classification. Where wood structural panel sheathing is used elsewhere, but not as the exposed finish, it shall be of a type manufactured with exterior glue (Exposure 1 or Exterior). Wood structural panel sheathing, connections and framing spacing shall be in accordance with Table 2304.6.1 for the applicable wind speed and exposure category where used in enclosed building with a mean roof height not greater than 9 m and a topographic factor  \( K_{z} \)  of 1.

Wood structural panels are defined in Chapter 2 as being plywood, OSB and composite panels. Each of these types of panel products has identical structural characteristics when manufactured to meet the DOC PS1 or PS 2 standards in accordance with Section 2303.1.4. This section requires equivalent exposure durability performance. It requires the classification to be Exposure 1 or Exterior where the material is likely to be exposed to the weather. According to the APA, "Exterior" panels are suitable for applications permanently exposed to weather, "Exposure 1" panels may be used for extended temporary exposure to weather (such as during construction when long delays are expected prior to providing permanent protection), "Exposure 2" panels apply to protected applications not exposed to high humidity and may be briefly subjected to the weather, while "Interior" panels are to be used only where permanent protection against the weather is provided.

Assessment of high-wind events has shown that failure of wall sheathing, in winds as low as 27 m/s, has led to damage due to breaching of the wall envelope. This section provides guidance for using wood structural panels to resist wind pressures. Table 2304.6.1 provides the required fastening, span rating, panel thickness and stud spacing for wood structural panel cladding based on wind speed and exposure category.

===== Page 1704 =====
Table 2304.6.1 provides guidelines for using wood structural panel wall sheathing to resist component and cladding wind pressures normal to the wall. The table clearly specifies the maximum wind speed and exposure category permitted for wood structural panel wall sheathing. It was developed using the component and cladding wind pressures (wind speed) given in Figure 30.5-1 of SBC 301 with the wood structural panel capacities based on the DOC PS 2 standard, engineering calculations and the APA panel design specification that is referenced in Section 2306.1. Nail head pull through and withdrawal, panel stiffness and bending strength were also considered. The panel-fasterer capacity was based on the area tributary to a single critical nail.

2304.7 Interior paneling. Softwood wood structural panels used for interior paneling shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 8 and shall be installed in accordance with Table 2304.10.2. Panels shall comply with DOC PS 1, DOC PS 2 or ANSI/APA PRP 210. Prefinished hardwood paneling shall meet the requirements of ANSI A135.5. Hardwood plywood shall conform to HPVA HP-1.

Interior paneling, similar to exterior paneling, must meet minimum standards of acceptance. DOC PS 1 and PS 2 establish the general standards for all soft-wood veneer panel products. CPA/ANSI A135.5 and HPVA HP-1 address the criteria for hardwood paneling and hardwood veneered plywood, respectively.

2304.8 Floor and roof sheathing. Structural floor sheathing and structural roof sheathing shall comply with Sections 2304.8.1 and 2304.8.2, respectively.

Floor and roof sheathing perform several functions. They are the primary base for both the walking surface for the floor and the main support of the roofing materials. Additionally, the sheathing transfers horizontally applied lateral forces to the vertical lateral-force-resisting elements. Floor sheathing is the structural element in a wood floor that transfers live loads to the floor joists.

Roof sheathing is typically covered by the roofing material. The sheathing typically provides the only means by which loads from wind are transferred to the structural framing members, so the fastening that completes this load path is critical. Panels are typically "span rated," which provides the designer guidance as to the maximum spacing that the framing members can be placed to adequately support imposed loads. The tables are for both lumber and wood structural panel floor and roof sheathing.
2304.8.1 Structural floor sheathing. Structural floor sheathing shall be designed in accordance with the general provisions of this code, considering engineering principals, material specifications and applicable loading and environmental conditions.

Floor sheathing conforming to the provisions of Table 2304.8(1), Table 2304.8(2),

TABLE 2304.8(3) or Table 2304.8(4) shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this section.

The tables referenced are used for both floor and roof applications (see commentary, Section 2304.8.2). In a two-layer floor sheathing system, the structural panels are placed at the bottom ("subfloor") and fastened directly to the framing members, and the top layer ("underlayment") is typically a different grade of material, occasionally specified to resist indentations depending on what floor finish material is to be installed.

2304.8.2 Structural roof sheathing. Structural roof sheathing shall be designed in accordance with the general provisions of this code and the special provisions in this section; considering engineering principals, material specifications and applicable loading and environmental conditions. Roof sheathing conforming to the provisions of Table 2304.8(1), Table 2304.8(2),

TABLE 2304.8(3) or Table 2304.8(5) shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this section. Wood structural panel roof sheathing shall be of a type manufactured with exterior glue (Exposure 1 or Exterior).

There are four tables referenced in this section that establish either allowable load or allowable span of structural sheathing typically produced by mills in North America. Use of the tables is straightforward. Simply locate with the span between structural framing members, and, depending on the direction of the framing, determine the minimum thickness required by the code. It may be necessary to install thicker material if the loads require additional support. Lumber and wood structural panel sheathing are required to be marked with grade stamps indicating the lumber grade, panel span rating or panel grade required by the appropriate table based on the conditions of use.

Table 2304.8(1) applies to "surfaced dry" or "surfaced unseasoned" lumber used for floor or roof sheathing. These terms refer to the condition of the lumber at the time it was surfaced or finished. Surfaced dry indicates a maximum moisture content of 19 percent at the time of surfacing. This is critical when determining the actual dimension of the lumber. A piece that is surfaced dry is narrower

===== Page 1705 =====
than a piece that is surfaced unseasoned (often referred to as surfaced green). The grade stamp will indicate whether the lumber was surfaced dry or surfaced green.

In Table 2304.8(2), the different agencies that publish grading rules are listed and are an important part of the criteria used in determining the adequacy of structural lumber sheathing. These requirements are outlined in ALSC standard DOC PS 20. The rules-writing agencies included in this table are the National Lumber Grades Authority (NLGA), West Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau (WCLIB), Western Wood Products Association (WWPA), Northern Softwood Lumber Bureau (NSLB), Northeastern Lumber Manufacturers Association (NELMA), Southern Pine Inspection Bureau (SPIB) and Redwood Inspection Service (RIS).

## See

TABLE 2304.8(3). Wood structural panels are also graded, but the type of grade stamp used identifies the thickness and the span capabilities of the piece. The panel span rating (first column of the table), also known as a "panel index," will appear on the grade stamp. The first number on the panel span rating indicates the allowable spacing of support members (rafters or trusses) in a roof application. The second number indicates the allowable spacing of floor joists or trusses in a floor application. For instance, if the span rating is 600/400, the panel may be used on roof joists spaced 600 mm on center (o.c.) and on floor joists spaced 400 mm o.c. Span ratings were developed for easy identification and to assist in verifying the correct use of panels in the field. According to Design of Wood Structures—ASD/LRFD, typical wood structural panel applications are not controlled so much by the uniform load requirements but depend more on the basis of panel deflection under concentrated loads and judged by the panel's performance under passing traffic. For the panel span rating to be applicable, other conditions of the table for loading and use must be met. For instance, for sheathing with a panel index of 600/400 to be used on roof rafters spaced 400 mm o.c., the allowable spacing of support members is also dependent on the type of edge support provided for the panels (see Note f). The table is applicable only when the strength axis of the panel is perpendicular to the supports, in other words, when the long edge of the panel is perpendicular to the joists or rafters.

See Table 2304.8(4). The subfloor is the structural element that supports the floor loads and is the substrate (supporting layer) for the underlayment. Underlayment is the smooth surface used as the substrate for the floor covering. Combination subfloor-underlayment is a single layer of sheathing that meets the structural requirements for subfloor and has a smooth surface suitable as underlayment for the floor covering. Wood species are grouped on the basis of their mechanical properties in DOC PS 1. Because bending stiffness and bending strength are the most important properties for many plywood uses, the species groups are based on bending stiffness and bending strength. Single-layer combined subfloor and underlayment is currently the most common method used for wood floor construction.

The table provides criteria for panels that may be used on roofs with significant live loads, the maximum live load being listed at 4.30 MPa). That being the case, it is clear that the live loads in excess of 1 MPa (which is generally the maximum roof live loading determined in Section 1607.12.2). Required panel grade and thickness is based on the spacing of rafters or trusses and the maximum allowable load at that span. Note that the table is based on five-ply plywood. In some cases, the allowable loads for four-ply plywood and composite panels must be reduced by 15 percent.

2304.9 Lumber decking. Lumber decking shall be designed and installed in accordance with the general provisions of this code and Sections 2304.9.1 through 2304.9.5.3. Other lumber decking patterns and connection designs shall be substantiated through engineering analysis.

Section 2304.9 has provisions for lumber decking. Alternative lumber decking patterns as well as alternative connection options are permitted to be utilized provided that they are substantiated through engineering analysis.

2304.9.1 General. Each piece of lumber decking shall be square-end trimmed. Where random lengths are furnished, each piece shall be square end trimmed across the face so that not less than 90 percent of the pieces are within 0.5 degrees of square. The ends of the pieces shall be permitted to be beveled up to 2 degrees from the vertical with the exposed face of the piece slightly longer than the opposite face of the piece. Tongue-and-groove decking shall be installed with the tongues up on sloped or pitched roofs with pattern faces down.

Along with design requirements in Section 2306.1.4, this section provides design and installation requirements for lumber decking, including tongue-and groove as well as mechanically laminated decking.

2304.9.2 Layout patterns. Lumber decking is permitted to be laid up following one of five

===== Page 1706 =====
standard patterns as defined in Sections 2304.9.2.1 through 2304.9.2.5.

This section describes typically used layout patterns for lumber decking. These layout patterns are determined, in part, by the location of end joints. The pattern is the basis for determining the allowable deck load in Section 2306.1.4.

2304.9.2.1 Simple span pattern. All pieces shall be supported on their ends (i.e., by two supports).

See the commentary to Sections 2304.9 and 2304.9.2 and Commentary Figure 2304.9.2.1.

2304.9.2.2 Two-span continuous pattern. All pieces shall be supported by three supports, and all end joints shall occur in line on alternating supports. Supporting members shall be designed to accommodate the load redistribution caused by this pattern.

See the commentary to Sections 2304.9 and 2304.9.2 and Commentary Figure 2304.9.2.2.

2304.9.2.3 Combination simple and two-span continuous pattern. Courses in end spans shall be alternating simple span pattern and two-span continuous pattern. End joints shall be staggered in adjacent courses and shall bear on supports.

See the commentary to Sections 2304.9 and 2304.9.2 and Commentary Figure 2304.9.2.3.

2304.9.2.4 Cantilevered pieces intermixed pattern. The decking shall extend across a minimum of three spans. Pieces in each starter course and every third course shall be simple span pattern. Pieces in other courses shall be cantilevered over the supports with end joints at alternating quarter or third points of the spans. Each piece shall bear on at least one support.

See the commentary to Sections 2304.9 and 2304.9.2 and Commentary Figure 2304.9.2.4.

2304.9.2.5 Controlled random pattern. The decking shall extend across not fewer than three spans. End joints of pieces within 150 mm of the end joints of the adjacent pieces in either direction shall be separated by not fewer than two intervening courses. In the end bays, each piece shall bear on one support or more. Where an end joint occurs in an end bay, the next piece in the same course shall continue over the first inner support for not less than 600 mm. The details of the controlled random pattern shall be as specified for each decking material in Section 2304.9.3.3, 2304.9.4.3 or 2304.9.5.3.

Decking that cantilevers beyond a support for a horizontal distance greater than 450 mm, 600 mm or 900 mm for 50 mm, 75 mm and 100 mm nominal thickness decking, respectively, shall comply with the following:

1 The maximum cantilevered length shall be 30 percent of the length of the first adjacent interior span.

2 A structural fascia shall be fastened to each decking piece to maintain a continuous, straight line.

3 There shall be no end joints in the decking between the cantilevered end of the decking and the centerline of the first adjacent interior span.

General requirements for controlled random layout are stated in this section. They apply along with the additional specific layout requirements subsequently given under mechanically laminated and tongue-and-groove decking. The second paragraph states requirements where there is a cantilevered span such as at a roof overhang (also see commentary, Sections 2304.9 and 2304.9.2).

2304.9.3 Mechanically laminated decking. Mechanically laminated decking shall comply with Sections 2304.9.3.1 through 2304.9.3.3.

This section provides construction requirements for square-edged lumber that is set on edge and mechanically fastened together with nails to produce a solid flooring.

2304.9.3.1 General. Mechanically laminated decking consists of square-edged dimension lumber laminations set on edge and nailed to the adjacent pieces and to the supports.

One method of constructing floor decking is the use of individual wood members set on edge, connected with nails and mechanically laminated together to produce a solid monolithic surface.

This section gives the fastening requirements for floors that are constructed of individual wood members set on edge and mechanically laminated to produce a continuous surface. For the floor to act as a unit, fastening is critical, and therefore it is prescribed in this section. If the floor is constructed in accordance with these fastening requirements, then for purposes of design it can be considered a solid wood floor acting as one element.

2304.9.3.2 Nailing. The length of nails connecting laminations shall be not less than two and one-half times the net thickness of each lamination. Where decking supports are 1.2 m on center or less, side nails shall be installed not more than 750 mm on center alternating between top and bottom edges and staggered one third of the spacing in adjacent laminations. Where supports are spaced more than 1.2 m on center, side nails shall be installed not more than 450 mm on center alternating between top and bottom edges and

===== Page 1707 =====
staggered one-third of the spacing in adjacent laminations. For mechanically laminated decking constructed with laminations of 50 mm nominal thickness, nailing in accordance with Table 2304.9.3.2 shall be permitted. Two side nails shall be installed at each end of butt-jointed pieces.

Laminations shall be toenailed to supports with 20d or larger common nails. Where the supports are 1200 mm on center or less, alternate laminations shall be toenailed to alternate supports; where supports are spaced more than 1200 mm on center, alternate laminations shall be toenailed to every support. For mechanically laminated decking constructed with laminations of 50 mm nominal thickness, toenailing in accordance with Table 2304.9.3.2 shall be permitted.

This section provides requirements for nailing the deck laminations together (see commentary, Section 2304.9.3.1). Table 2304.9.3.2 provides a fastening schedule for mechanically laminated decking using laminations of 50 mm nominal thickness.

2304.9.3.3 Controlled random pattern. There shall be a minimum distance of 600 mm between end joints in adjacent courses. The pieces in the first and second courses shall bear on not fewer than two supports with end joints in these two courses occurring on alternate supports. Not more than seven intervening courses shall be permitted before this pattern is repeated.

These requirements are specific to the layout of tongue-and-groove decking and are in addition to the general limitations stated in Section 2304.9.3.2 (see Commentary Figure 2304.9.3.3).

2304.9.4 50-mm sawn tongue-and-groove decking. 50-mm sawn tongue-and-groove decking shall comply with Sections 2304.9.4.1 through 2304.9.4.3.

These section covers 50-mm tongue-and groove boards used for decking.

2304.9.4.1 General. 50-mm decking shall have a maximum moisture content of 15 percent. Decking shall be machined with a single tongue-and-groove pattern. Each decking piece shall be nailed to each support.

Another method of floor construction is the use of sawn lumber tongue-and-groove decking. The projecting tongue on one side fits into the matching groove of the adjacent board, causing these two elements to deflect as a unit when subjected to loads. As Commentary Figure 2304.9.4.1 illustrates, 50 mm thick tongue-and-groove boards have one tongue and one groove per board.

2304.9.4.2 Nailing. Each piece of decking shall be toenailed at each support with one 16d common nail through the tongue and face-nailed with one 16d common nail.

For the floor to distribute loads and act as a unit, fastening is critical; therefore, it is prescribed in this section.

2304.9.4.3 Controlled random pattern. There shall be a minimum distance of 600 mm between end joints in adjacent courses. The pieces in the first and second courses shall bear on not fewer than two supports with end joints in these two courses occurring on alternate supports. Not more than seven intervening courses shall be permitted before this pattern is repeated.

These requirements are specific to the layout of tongue-and-groove decking and are in addition to the general limitations stated in Section 2304.9.2.5. (See commentary Figure 2304.9.3).

2304.9.5 75-mm and 100-mm sawn tongue-and-groove decking. 75-mm and 100-mm sawn tongue-and-groove decking shall comply with Sections 2304.9.5.1 through 2304.9.5.3.

The section covers 75-mm and 100-mm thick tongue-and-groove boards used for decking. (See commentary Figure 2304.9.5.1).

2304.9.5.1 General. 75-mm and 100-mm decking shall have a maximum moisture content of 19 percent. Decking shall be machined with a double tongue and groove pattern. Decking pieces shall be interconnected and nailed to the supports.

As Commentary Figure 2304.9.5.1 illustrates, 75 mm and 100 mm thick tongue-and-groove boards have a pair of tongues and a pair of grooves in each board.

2304.9.5.2 Nailing. Each piece shall be toenailed at each support with one 40d common nail and face-nailed with one 60d common nail. Courses shall be spiked to each other with 200 mm spikes at maximum intervals of 750 mm through predrilled edge holes penetrating to a depth of approximately 100 mm. One spike shall be installed at a distance not exceeding 250 mm from the end of each piece.

For the floor to distribute loads and act as a unit, fastening is critical; therefore, it is prescribed in this section.

2304.9.5.3 Controlled random pattern. There shall be a minimum distance of 1200 mm between end joints in adjacent courses. Pieces not bearing on a support are permitted to be located in interior bays provided that the adjacent pieces in the same course continue over the support for not less than 600 mm. This condition shall not occur more than once in every six courses in each interior bay.

These requirements are specific to the layout of tongue-and-groove decking and are in addition to the general limitations stated in Section 2304.9.2.5.

===== Page 1708 =====
2304.10 Connectors and fasteners. Connectors and fasteners shall comply with the applicable provisions of Sections 2304.10.2 through 2304.10.8.

This section contains requirements for connectors and fasteners used to connect wood members, including nails, staples, joist hangers, clips and framing anchors.

Section 2301.2 gives alternative design methodologies for wood construction: the ASD method; the LRFD method; and conventional light-frame methodologies that are embodied in Section 2308 of the code. Both ASD and LRFD are covered in the ANSI/AWC NDS and SDPWS. If conventional construction provisions are used and there is no design provided by means of the ASD or LRFD methodologies, then the prescriptive fastening of Table 2304.10.2 is typically all that is required. However, where the structure is designed by the ASD or LRFD methods, fastening must comply with the applicable design standard as well as the minimum prescriptive fastenings specified in Table 2304.10.2.

2304.10.1 Connection fire-resistance rating.

Fire-resistance ratings for connections in Type IV-A, IV-B, or IV-C construction shall be determined by one of the following:

1 Testing in accordance with Section 703.2 where the connection is part of the fire resistance test.

2 Engineering analysis that demonstrates that the temperature rise at any portion of the connection is limited to an average temperature rise of  \( 140^{\circ} \) C, and a maximum temperature rise of  \( 180^{\circ} \) C, for a time corresponding to the required fire-resistance rating of the structural element being connected. For the purposes of this analysis, the connection includes connectors, fasteners, and portions of wood members included in the structural design of the connection.

Sections 704.2 and 704.3 require connections of columns and other primary structural members to be protected with materials that have the required fire-resistance rating. This section provides two options for demonstrating compliance with this requirement for connections in Types IV-A, IV-B and IV-C construction: a testing option and a calculation option. Types IV-A, IV-B and IV-C construction utilize mass timber elements that have inherent fire resistance. Item 1 allows connections that are part of a successful fire resistance test, per Section 703.2, to be considered acceptable evidence of meeting the requirements of Sections 704.2 and 704.3. Item 2 allows for engineering analysis.

2304.10.2 Faster requirements. Connections for wood members shall be designed in accordance with the appropriate methodology in Section 2302.1. The number and size of fasteners connecting wood members shall be not less than that set forth in Table 2304.10.2.

Section 2301.2 gives alternative design methodologies for wood construction: the ASD method; the LRFD method; and conventional light-frame methodologies that are embodied in Section 2308 of the code. If conventional provisions are used and there is no design being conducted by means of the ASD or LRFD methodologies, then the prescriptive fastening of Table 2304.10.2 is all that is required. However, where the ASD or LRFD methods are used, fastening must comply with the associated design standard as well as the prescriptive fastenings specified in Table 2304.10.2.

This table provides the minimum fastening requirements for all light wood-framed construction, regardless of the design method used. Familiarity with the terms and configurations of conventional frame construction is necessary to apply this table. All members identified within this table are commonly described in any available wood design or construction manual. See Commentary Figure 2304.10.2 for an illustration of certain nail types.

2304.10.3 Sheathing fasteners. Sheathing nails or other approved sheathing connectors shall be driven so that their head or crown is flush with the surface of the sheathing.

This requirement is a matter of workmanship (See commentary Figure 2304.10.3 for an illustration of a nail driven to fasten sheathing properly). Profunding nails that are not fully driven do not provide the intended connecting capacity and could be hazardous. Likewise, nails that are overdriven into structural sheathing may not perform as expected. Framing installation in the field is often less than perfect and fasteners can be overdriven to a point where the top layer of sheathing is fractured and crushed beneath the nail head. An occasional overdriven nail is common and may not be significant. However, as the percentage of overdriven fasteners increases, the issue becomes judging the point at which this adversely affects the stiffness and shear capacity of a diaphragm or shear wall element. The APA has recognized that this is a common occurrence and has made a guideline available at no cost on its website.

===== Page 1709 =====
(www.apawood.org). Another condition to be aware of in sheathing nailing is where the depth of the supporting member is less than the length of a commonly used fastener, such as in a case where sheathing will be applied over the top of flat decking. Shorter nails are available for these situations, but the holding and shear capacities are typically reduced.

2304.10.4 Joist hangers and framing anchors. Connections depending on joist hangers or framing anchors, ties and other mechanical fastenings not otherwise covered are permitted where approved. The vertical load-bearing capacity, torsional moment capacity and deflection characteristics of joist hangers shall be determined in accordance with ASTM D7147.

This section recognizes the use of premanufactured joist and framing anchors as an alternative to conventional fastening. These items are engineered components and must be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and design specifications. Hangers and framing anchors specified by the manufacturer must have load capacities and torsional requirements developed in accordance with the referenced standard. All fasteners required to make the framing anchor or hanger adequately support the design load are specified by the manufacturer, who also must describe any limitations that the designer or contractor needs to consider when using the product. In order to facilitate approval of these products, many hardware manufacturers have ICC Evaluation Service Reports (ESRs) that provide design values and other detailed information for properly installing their framing anchors.

2304.10.5 Other fasteners. Clips, staples, glues and other approved methods of fastening are permitted where approved.

Clips, staples, glues and other methods of fastening are permitted where approved. In addition to joist hangers and typical fastening in accordance with Table 2304.10.2, there are other fastening methods that can be approved by the building official, provided there is sufficient evidence to demonstrate their adequacy. This section is included in the code to address the fact that new fasteners and connection methods are continually being developed, which necessitates that the building official give consideration to viable alternatives. In general, other fasteners or fastening systems that are not specifically covered by the code can be approved under the alternative materials, design and methods of construction specified in Section 104.11. In order to facilitate approval of alternative products that are not specified in the code, many product manufacturers work with ICC Evaluation Service to develop acceptance criteria and, ultimately, ESRs. These include detailed information to assist the building official in determining code compliance and help the inspector verify proper installation in the field.

2304.10.6 Fasteners and connectors in contact with preservative-treated and fire-retardant-treated wood. Fasteners, including nuts and washers, and connectors in contact with preservative-treated and fire-retardant-treated wood shall be in accordance with Sections 2304.10.6.1 through 2304.10.6.4. The coating weights for zinc-coated fasteners shall be in accordance with ASTM A153. Stainless steel driven fasteners shall be in accordance with the material requirements of ASTM F 1667.

Corrosion-resistant fasteners are typically required for use in treated wood. This applies to fire-retardant treated wood as well as preservative-treated wood. Some chemicals used to preservative-treat or fire retardant-treat wood can have a corrosive effect on fasteners. This is a concern since significant corrosion will adversely affect the fastener's strength.

2304.10.6.1 Fasteners and connectors for preservative treated wood. Fasteners, including nuts and washers, in contact with preservative-treated wood shall be of hot-dipped zinc-coated galvanized steel, stainless steel, silicon bronze or copper. Staples shall be of stainless steel. Fasteners other than nails, staples, timber rivets, wood screws and lag screws shall be permitted to be of mechanically deposited zinc-coated steel with coating weights in accordance with ASTM B695, Class 55 minimum. Connectors that are used in exterior applications and in contact with preservative-treated wood shall have coating types and weights in accordance with the treated wood or connector manufacturer's recommendations. In the absence of manufacturer's recommendations, a minimum of ASTM A653, Type G185 zinc-coated galvanized steel, or equivalent, shall be used.

Exception: Plain carbon steel fasteners, including nuts and washers, in SBX/DOT and zinc borate preservative treated wood in an interior, dry environment shall be permitted.

Where there are concerns with decay or potential termite damage, the code requires either a naturally durable species of wood or wood that is treated with a preservative. Since the discontinuation of chromated copper arsenate for preservative-treated wood in residential or general consumer products, alternative preservative treatments have been

===== Page 1710 =====
necessary. Studies show that some of these are more corrosive to steel anchors and connectors. Corrosion-resistant fasteners are typically required for use in preservative-treated wood. This includes materials such as stainless steel or copper. Carbon steel typically must be galvanized. The exception is based on reports that show sodium borate disodium octaborate tetrahydrate (SBX/DOT) and zinc borate to be somewhat less corrosive than other alternative preservative treatments. In an interior location where moisture is not a concern, wood treated with these preservatives allows the use of plain carbon steel fasteners. The base requirements limit galvanized steel to the hot-dipped process. The hot-dip galvanizing process has the relative advantage of being very insensitive to process variables. Though mechanically galvanized fasteners can perform equally to hot-dipped galvanized fasteners, the mechanical galvanizing process, if not performed properly, may produce fasteners whose corrosion resistance does not equal that of hot-dipped galvanized fasteners. Mechanical galvanizing is very common for screws, and in fact is possibly the only way to deposit a thick zinc coating on them. Wood screws and lag screws are frequently installed in predrilled holes, so abrasion of the finish is not the same problem as for nails. Because mechanical galvanizing is a preferred method for certain fastener types, the code recognizes this process where it is appropriate.

Guidance is given for connectors that are in contact with preservative-treated wood and used in exterior applications. The primary requirement is to follow the manufacturer's recommendations. Where none are given, the minimum coating, in accordance with ASTM A653, must be G185, which is the minimum coating currently recommended by many manufacturers.

2304.10.6.2 Fastenings for wood foundations. Fastenings, including nuts and washers, for wood foundations shall be as required in AWC PWF.

AWC Permanent Wood Foundation (PWF) Design Specification requires specific types of corrosion-resistant nails for locations below grade and above grade in wood foundations, based on the increased exposure to moisture in below-grade applications as well as the corrosive nature of preservative treatments.

2304.10.6.3 Fasteners for fire-retardant-treated wood used in exterior applications or wet or damp locations. Fasteners, including nuts and washers, for fire-retardant treated wood used in exterior applications or wet or damp locations shall be of hot-dipped zinc-coated galvanized steel, stainless steel, silicon bronze or copper. Staples shall be of stainless steel. Fasteners other than nails, staples, timber rivets, wood screws and lag screws shall be permitted to be of mechanically deposited zinc-coated steel with coating weights in accordance with ASTM B 695, Class 55 minimum.

Corrosion-resistant fasteners are required for fire-retardant-treated wood in exterior applications or other locations subject to moisture. The base requirements limit galvanized steel to the hot-dipped process. Because mechanical galvanizing is a preferred method for certain fastener types, the code recognizes this process where it is deemed appropriate.

2304.10.6.4 Fasteners for fire-retardant-treated wood used in interior applications. Fasteners, including nuts and washers, for fire-retardant-treated wood used in interior locations shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. In the absence of manufacturer's recommendations, Section 2304.10.6.3 shall apply.

The primary requirement for fasteners in fire-retardant-treated wood used on the interior is to follow the manufacturer's recommendations. Where none are given, the requirements for exterior applications apply.

2304.10.7 Load path. Where wall framing members are not continuous from the foundation sill to the roof, the members shall be secured to ensure a continuous load path. Where required, sheet metal clamps, ties or clips shall be formed of galvanized steel or other approved corrosion-resistant material not less than 0.85 mm base metal thickness.

In conventional construction, the minimum fastening required by Table 2304.10.2 is intended to provide a continuous connection between framing elements as required by this section. If the loads on the building exceed the parameters, the building, in total or in part, must be designed in accordance with the ASD or LRFD methodologies and the connections must be designed in accordance with those standards, providing continuity of load support throughout the structure. The designed connections may incorporate engineered tie or strap components with capacities specified by the manufacturer. This section specifies the minimum thickness of sheet metal for fabricated straps or ties to 0.85 mm base metal thickness, which is common among manufacturers. Designers and contractors must keep in mind that a wood framed building is simply a huge assembly of multiple independent parts connected together to form a complete structural system. When a building is subject to external forces, each independent

===== Page 1711 =====
part has a tendency to move into a different position and this tendency must be controlled by having a complete path to deliver the imposed forces into the ground. This load path may consist of hangers from a beam to a column, metal straps from an upper-level stud to a lower-level stud or from hold-down anchors into the concrete, etc. There are countless applications and load path possibilities, but the overall concept is that every individual piece must be adequately fastened to some adjacent piece to form the complete structure.

2304.10.8 Framing requirements. Wood columns and posts shall be framed to provide full end bearing. Alternatively, column-and-post end connections shall be designed to resist the full compressive loads, neglecting end-bearing capacity. Column-and-post end connections shall be fastened to resist lateral and net induced uplift forces.

This section requires the framing workmanship to be such that the ends of wood columns and posts, including studs, bear completely atop the supporting member, whether it be a wood sill plate or a metal base connector. If it does not bear fully on the entire cross section, then design calculations are necessary in order to show that the bearing method provided will be capable of supporting the loads without using end bearing capacity. It also requires a positive connection (not merely a friction connection) to resist incidental lateral forces and any anticipated uplift forces. For instance, a wood column supporting beams in the basement of a structure could not simply bear on the concrete pad beneath it without some means of positive anchorage to the concrete in order to prevent it from accidently being displaced on impact by a person or an object. If the combination of loads on the structure could result in uplift forces, then an adequate connection designed to resist uplift would also be required. This section is a further extension of the philosophy outlined in Section 2304.10.7.

2304.11 Heavy timber construction. Where a structure, portion thereof or individual structural elements are required by provisions of this code to be of heavy timber, the building elements therein shall comply with the applicable provisions of Sections 2304.11.1 through 2304.11.4. Minimum dimensions of heavy timber shall comply with the applicable requirements in Table 2304.11 based on roofs or floors supported and the configuration of each structural element, or in Sections 2304.11.2 through 2304.11.4. Lumber decking shall be in accordance with 2304.9.

Minimum dimensions of heavy timber shall comply with the applicable requirements in Table 2304.11 based on roofs or floors supported and the configuration of each structural element, or in Sections 2304.11.2 through 2304.11.4. Lumber decking shall be in accordance with 2304.9.

This section provides the specific details and minimum dimensions of components for heavy timber construction. Heavy timber is utilized in Type IV Construction as described in Section 602.4. Heavy timber construction originated in New England to serve the needs of the growing textile industry. As the industry modernized, the need for larger open space, unobstructed by columns, gradually reduced the demand for this type of construction.

Today, due primarily to its architectural aesthetic value, heavy timber construction is used in other occupancies. It is commonly used for assembly and mercantile buildings, such as schools, mosques, auditoriums, gymnasiums, malls and supermarkets.

The minimum dimensions of different heavy timber structural elements are provided in Sections 2304.11.1.1 through 2304.11.1.3. A structural analysis must be performed to verify that the minimum dimensions are adequate. These final dimensions will always be based on a shrunken section since timbers are ordinarily supplied in a green condition, unless they are special products manufactured to specific tolerances. Details and minimum dimensions of heavy timber floors, walls and roof decks are given in Sections 2304.11.2 through 2304.11.4.

2304.11.1 Details of heavy timber structural members. Heavy timber structural members shall be detailed and constructed in accordance with Sections 2304.11.1 through 2304.11.1.3.

This section defines what heavy timber has to be by specifying minimum dimensions and specific details of construction. Basically, the minimum dimensions are representative of what is needed for an unprotected wood member to achieve a 1-hour fire resistance rating. The minimum dimensions do not signify that any structural requirements are met. A structural analysis is required to determine the needed dimensions of the members for structural performance.

2304.11.1.1 Column. Minimum dimensions of columns shall be in accordance with Table 2304.11. Columns shall be continuous or superimposed throughout all stories and connected in an approved manner. Girders and beams at column connections shall be closely fitted around columns and adjoining ends shall be cross tied to each other, or intertied by caps or ties, to transfer horizontal loads across joints. Wood bolsters shall not be placed on tops of columns unless the columns support roof loads only. Where traditional heavy timber detailing is used, connections shall be by means of reinforced concrete or metal caps with brackets, by properly designed steel or iron caps, with pintles and base plates, by timber splice plates affixed to the

===== Page 1712 =====
columns by metal connectors housed within the contact faces, or by other approved methods.

The AWC publication, WCD 5, Heavy Timber Construction, provides details for the proper connection of heavy timber columns and beams. Traditionally, heavy timber structures were designed and constructed using a prescriptive approach, much like today's conventional construction provisions for light frame buildings. The number and size of bolts, lag screws or connectors should be determined through analysis of the loads to be supported. Pintles provide a method to fasten the butt ends of beams or columns. A pintle acts like a short column, connecting the ends of the structural elements. Minimum sizes for fire-resistance rating are given in Table 2304.11.

Where columns and girders or beams intersect, care must be taken for load transfer. Proper detailing at the intersection of columns and girders will limit the effects of shrinkage. Elements that are not continuous must be properly fastened together to transfer design forces. Today's engineered wood products are available in multiple depths and widths, and in lengths up to 18 m, so continuous span structural elements are readily available. Bolster blocks are used to reduce the compression perpendicular to grain stresses where roof beams bear on columns. The shrinkage of the bolster block must be considered in the roof design. Roof beams must have a positive connection to the column to resist uplift.

2304.11.1.2 Floor framing. Minimum dimensions of floor framing shall be in accordance with Table 2304.11. Approved wall plate boxes or hangers shall be provided where wood beams, girders or trusses rest on masonry or concrete walls. Where intermediate beams are used to support a floor, they shall rest on top of girders, or shall be supported by an approved metal hanger into which the ends of the beams shall be closely fitted. Where traditional heavy timber detailing is used, these connections shall be permitted to be supported by ledgers or blocks securely fastened to the sides of the girders.

Wood members must not bear directly on masonry or concrete, otherwise they will absorb moisture from these elements and lose strength in bearing due to decay. Typically, a steel-bearing plate or custom steel hanger is used to support heavy timber elements. Bearing plates provide an even distribution of load on the wall. Wall plate boxes should be designed and detailed to provide a positive connection to the masonry. Where direct bearing on top of the girders is not possible or desirable, a metal hanger designed to transfer
all induced loads is permitted. An additional advantage to using a hanger is less shrinkage. Beams consisting of green lumber should be installed so their top edge is slightly above the top edge of the girder to allow for shrinkage.

2304.11.1.3 Roof framing. Minimum dimensions of roof framing shall be in accordance with Table 2304.11. Every roof girder and not less than every alternate roof beam shall be anchored to its supporting member to resist forces as required in Chapter 16.

Anchorage of roof beams and girders should be in accordance with the engineered design. This section provides minimum acceptable anchorage practices that are especially important in unusual or discontinuous types of roof framing, such as the "sawtooth" arrangement. Sawtooth roof construction is used to provide large amounts of daylight into the floor area of the building. The roof line looks much like the cutting edge of a saw, with regularly spaced peaks and valleys. The vertical or near vertical line connecting the peaks and valleys is filled with glazing. When this unique framing pattern is used, the framing members must be adequately anchored to the main roof supports.

2304.11.2 Partitions and walls. Partitions and walls shall comply with Section 2304.11.2.1 or 2304.11.2.2.

See the commentaries for Sections 2304.11.2.1 and 2304.11.2.2.

2304.11.2.1 Exterior walls. Exterior walls shall be permitted to be cross-laminated timber not less than 100 mm in thickness meeting the requirements of Section 2303.1.4.

This section provides the requirements for exterior walls of cross-laminated timber.

2304.11.2.2 Interior walls and partitions. Interior walls and partitions shall be of solid wood construction formed by not less than two layers of 25 mm matched boards or laminated construction 100 mm thick, or of 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction.

Minimum construction requirements and dimensions for partitions in heavy timber construction are provided in this section. Partitions must either be formed by not less than two layers of 25 mm matched boards or laminated construction 100 mm thick if they are constructed of solid wood. Partitions are permitted to be constructed of materials other than solid wood if they have at least a 1-hour fire-resistance rating. An example of the use of alternative materials is when a fire-resistance rating for a corridor wall is required. It is common practice to utilize a 1-hour fire-resistance-rated stud and gypsum wallboard.

===== Page 1713 =====
assembly between the exposed columns to form the walls of the corridor.

2304.11.3 Floors. Floors shall be without concealed spaces or with concealed spaces complying with Section 602.4.4.3. Wood floors shall be constructed in accordance with Section 2304.11.3.1 or 2304.11.3.2.

See the commentary to Sections 602.4.4.3, 2304.11.3.1 and 2304.11.3.2.

2304.11.3.1 Cross-laminated timber floors. Cross-laminated timber shall be not less than 100 mm in actual thickness. Cross-laminated timber shall be continuous from support to support and mechanically fastened to one another. Cross-laminated timber shall be permitted to be connected to walls without a shrinkage gap providing swelling or shrinking is considered in the design. Corbeling of masonry walls under the floor shall be permitted to be used.

Cross-laminated timber (CLT) is a large, thick panel composed of crosswise layers of dimension lumber bound together. Where used in floors, CLT is unlike traditional plank decking because the CLT panel doesn't have joints to protect. Therefore, there is no requirement for sheathing. Sheathing can be used on CLT, but is not necessary for compliance with this section.

2304.11.3.2 Sawn or glued-laminated plank floors. Sawn or glued-laminated plank floors shall be one of the following:

1 Sawn or glued-laminated planks, splined or tongue-and-groove, of not less than 75 mm nominal in thickness covered with 25 mm nominal dimension tongue-and-groove flooring, laid crosswise or diagonally, 12.5 mm wood structural panel or 12.5 mm particleboard.

2 Planks not less than 100 mm nominal in width set on edge close together and well spiked and covered with 25 mm nominal dimension flooring or 12.5 mm wood structural panel or 12.5 mm particleboard.

The lumber shall be laid so that continuous lines of joints will occur only at points of support. Floors shall not extend closer than 12.5 mm to walls. Such 12.5 mm space shall be covered by a molding fastened to the wall and so arranged that it will not obstruct the swelling or shrinkage movements of the floor. Corbeling of masonry walls under the floor shall be permitted to be used in place of molding.

Heavy timber (HT) flooring is required to consist, at minimum, of 75 mm-thick sawn or glued-laminated planks, splined floors or tongue-and-groove floors with an overlayment of 25 mm tongue and groove flooring, laid crosswise or diagonally. HT flooring may also consist of 12.5 mm particleboard or planks at least 100 mm in width set on edge and secured together, with an appropriate overlayment, such as 25 mm hardwood flooring or a 12.5 mm wood structural panel. Flooring in Type IV construction is not permitted to have concealed spaces because an undetected fire can spread quickly in combustible concealed floor spaces. Because of the support afforded by adjacent members, continuous joints must only occur over supports.

Wood flooring must be fastened to supports that are perpendicular to the planking. Fastening must not be made to beams or girders that are parallel to the planks. This precaution is intended to prevent separation of the planks because of differential movement of the beam relative to the girders and possible expansion/contraction due to differing moisture or humidity levels. This section requires a minimum 12.5 mm clearance between the wood flooring and exterior walls. This will prevent damage to the walls if the flooring expands or moves due to factors such as use and natural forces. It should be emphasized that the integrity of the floor assembly must be maintained to provide the equivalent of a 1-hour fire resistance rating. In addition, the 12.5 mm gap must be protected by a molding connected to the wall so that any possible contracting or expanding of the floor is not impeded. If masonry walls are utilized, corbeling of the masonry may be used as an alternate to the molding requirements.

2304.11.4 Roof decks. Roofs shall be without concealed spaces or with concealed spaces complying with Section 602.4.4.3 Roof decks shall be constructed in accordance with Section 2304.11.4.1 or 2304.11.4.2. Other types of decking shall be an alternative that provides equivalent fire resistance and structural properties. Where supported by a wall, roof decks shall be anchored to walls to resist forces determined in accordance with Chapter 16. Such anchors shall consist of steel bolts, lags, screws or approved hardware of sufficient strength to resist prescribed forces.

The roof deck must be anchored frequently enough to resist uplift forces as prescribed in Chapter 16. This type of anchorage is not covered by the conventional construction provisions of the code; therefore, engineering is required in accordance with the approved methods, ASD or LRFD. See the commentary to Section 602.4.4.3.

2304.11.4.1 Cross-laminated timber roofs. Cross-laminated timber roofs shall be not less than 75 mm nominal in thickness and shall be continuous

===== Page 1714 =====
from support to support and mechanically fastened to one another.

Minimum dimensions for cross-laminated timber roofs are specified here to establish a minimum fire resistance rating for this material where used in Type IV construction. This does not eliminate the need to perform a structural analysis to determine the required thicknesses for structural load-carrying performance.

2304.11.4.2 Sawn, wood structural panel, or glued-laminated plank roofs. Sawn, wood structural panel, or glued-laminated plank roofs shall be one of the following:

1 Sawn or glued laminated, splined or tongue-and groove plank, not less than 50 mm nominal in thickness.

2 32 mm wood structural panel (exterior glue).

3 Planks not less than 75 mm nominal in width, set on edge close together and laid as required for floors.

Just as for flooring in Section 2304.11.3.2, minimum dimensions and details are provided for use in heavy timber construction, primarily to achieve the fire resistance rating where installed in Type IV construction. This does not eliminate the need to perform a structural analysis to determine the required thicknesses for structural load-carrying performance.

2304.12 Protection against decay and termites. Wood shall be protected from decay and termites in accordance with the applicable provisions of Sections 2304.12.1 through 2304.12.4. This section requires protection against decay and termites where the stated conditions apply.

2304.12.1 Locations requiring waterborne preservatives or naturally durable wood. Wood used above ground in the locations specified in Sections 2304.12.1.1 through 2304.12.1.5 shall be naturally durable wood or preservative-treated wood using waterborne preservatives, in

accordance with AWPA U1 for above ground use.
AWPA U1 covers aspects of treated wood from the treating process to appropriate treatment retention levels for specific applications. Wood products used in locations identified in this section are particularly susceptible to deterioration, which can result from continuous or intermittent contact with moisture or termites.

Decay is caused by fungi, which are low forms of plant life that attack the cell walls of wood in order to feed on the contents of the cells. For fungi to attack wood in service, the following conditions must be present: (1) temperature in the range of  \( 1^{\circ} \) C to  \( 38^{\circ} \) C, (2) adequate supply of oxygen, and (3) wood-moisture content in excess of 20 percent. A properly constructed and maintained building will typically remain at a moisture content of less than 15 percent throughout its life, but some special conditions might cause fluctuations leading to problems.

2304.12.1.1 Joists, girders and subfloor. Wood joists or wood structural floors that are closer than 450 mm or wood girders that are closer than 300 mm to the exposed ground in crawl spaces or unexcavated areas located within the perimeter of the building foundation shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

This section establishes the need to protect floor elements that are in close proximity to exposed ground. The clearances specified in this section are recommended for all buildings and are considered necessary to:

1 Maintain wood elements in permanent structures at a safe moisture content by promoting air circulation and ventilation of the crawl space.

2 Provide a termite barrier.

3 Facilitate periodic inspections (see commentary Figure 2304.12.1.1).

Where it is not possible or practical to comply with the clearances specified, the use of naturally durable or pressure-preservative-treated wood is necessary. However, where terms are known to exist, space must be provided for periodic inspections. Often, termite infestations, result from poor construction or improper clearance between wood framing and the surrounding soil. Unfortunately, terms are very determined insects and will often build small, moisture-controlled tubes or tunnels from the ground surface to the source of food, bypassing inedible barriers, which is one of the reasons it is important to provide adequate space below floor framing for periodic visual inspections of wood framing.

2304.12.1.2 Wood supported by exterior foundation walls. Wood framing members, including wood sheathing, that are in contact with exterior foundation walls and are less than 200 mm from exposed earth shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

Experience has shown that foundation walls can absorb moisture from the ground and convey moisture to wood framing in contact with the foundation. This section requires a clearance (see Commentary Figure 2304.12.1.1) that minimizes the chances of moisture being drawn to the framing. The clearance also provides an exposed foundation surface that allows for a visual inspection for termite tubes.

2304.12.1.3 Exterior walls below grade. Wood framing members and furring strips in direct

===== Page 1715 =====
contact with the interior of exterior masonry or concrete walls below grade shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

Wood attached directly to masonry or concrete will draw moisture from these materials, and may reach a moisture content greater than 20 percent, depending on the relative humidity of the basement.

2304.12.1.4 Sleepers and sills. Sleepers and sills on a concrete or masonry slab that is in direct contact with earth shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

Wood in contact with either the earth or material that retains moisture must be naturally durable or preservative treated. The moisture content of wood will change based on the relative humidity of the air and the moisture of materials with which it is in contact. Interior slabs that are protected from the earth by an impervious moisture barrier should not be considered in direct contact with the earth for purposes of this requirement. Sometimes this moisture barrier becomes damaged in the course of construction but will remain intact for the most part. Moisture-sensitive flooring materials typically require special measures or care to be taken during placement of the concrete slab and preparation of the subbase, but interior wall sill plates will typically maintain an acceptable moisture content even if special drying measures are not taken for the slab.

2304.12.1.5 Wood siding. Clearance between wood siding and earth on the exterior of a building shall not be less than 150 mm or less than 50 mm vertical from concrete steps, porch slabs, patio slabs and similar horizontal surfaces exposed to the weather except where siding, sheathing and wall framing are of naturally durable or preservative treated wood.

Exterior siding is required to have a minimum 150 mm clearance above exposed earth and a 50 mm clearance above concrete such as slabs and steps. Exterior wood siding should extend at least 25 mm below the top of the foundation to provide a drip line protecting the sill from rainwater. The siding is typically held away from the foundation with a starter strip attached to the sheathing that ends at the bottom of the plate. The 25 mm overhang causes the rainwater to drip off the bottom edge of the siding, rather than being absorbed by the underlying sheathing. A minimum clearance illustrated in Commentary Figure 2304.12.1.5(1) must be provided for wood siding that is neither naturally durable nor preservative treated. A reduced clearance of 50 mm is permitted at horizontal surfaces such as concrete patios or steps [see Commentary Figure 2304.12.1.5(2)].
2304.12.2 Other locations. Wood used in the locations specified in Sections 2304.12.2.1 through 2304.12.2.8 shall be naturally durable wood or preservative-treated wood in accordance with AWPA U1. Preservative-treated wood used in interior locations shall be protected with two coats of urethane, shellac, latex epoxy or varnish unless waterborne preservatives are used. Prior to application of the protective finish, the wood shall be dried in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.

This section introduces the subsections dealing with locations where wood (other than that treated with waterborne preservatives) is permitted under certain circumstances, as long as treatment is in accordance with the AWPA U1 standard. As a precaution, there is a requirement for the drying of treated wood and its sealing where it is used on the interior of a building.

2304.12.2.1 Girder ends. The ends of wood girders entering exterior masonry or concrete walls shall be provided with a 12.5 mm airspace on top, sides and end, unless naturally durable or preservative-treated wood is used.

Clearance around the ends of girders prevents moisture from migrating from the concrete into the wood. The minimum clearance that is shown in commentary Figure 2304.12.2.1 allows for air circulation and periodic inspection for termites. This requirement has been in the model codes for many years, proving it to be an effective step in controlling wood deterioration.

2304.12.2.2 Posts or columns. Posts or columns supporting permanent structures and supported by a concrete or masonry slab or footing that is in direct contact with the earth shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood.

Exception: Posts or columns that meet all of the following:

1. Are not exposed to the weather, or are protected by a roof, eave, overhang, or other covering if exposed to the weather.

2. Are supported by concrete piers or metal pedestals projected not less than 25 mm above the slab or deck and are separated from the concrete pier by an impervious moisture barrier.

3. Are located not less than 200 mm above exposed earth.

Where a post or column is directly in concrete that is in direct contact with earth, it must be naturally durable or preservative treated. The exception illustrated in Commentary Figure 2304.12.2.2 permits the use of common, untreated lumber where the post or column is isolated from the earth or concrete. Generally,

===== Page 1716 =====
structural elements in basements or cellars are easier to inspect. Posts or columns in crawl spaces are required to have an 200 mm clearance to safeguard against termites between inspections and the clearance is identical to Section 2304.12.1.2. Requiring an impervious moisture barrier is intended to restrict the absorption of water from the earth or concrete pier.

2304.12.2.3 Supporting member for permanent appurtenances. Naturally durable or preservative-treated wood shall be utilized for those portions of wood members that form the structural supports of buildings, balconies, porches or similar permanent building appurtenances where such members are exposed to the weather without adequate protection from a roof, eave, overhang or other covering to prevent moisture or water accumulation on the surface or at joints between members.

Exception: Sawn lumber in buildings located in a geographical region where experience has demonstrated that climatic conditions preclude the need to use durable materials where the structure is exposed to the weather.

Decks and porches exposed to rain are subject to deterioration. In desert areas where rainfall is slight, there may not be enough moisture to cause any deterioration; therefore, the exception is provided for sawn lumber. It is important to confirm climatic conditions with the weather bureau or the building official to determine the proper course of action in protecting these appurtenant structures.

2304.12.2.4 Supporting members for permeable floors and roofs. Wood structural members that support moisture permeable floors or roofs that are exposed to the weather, such as concrete or masonry slabs, shall be of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood unless separated from such floors or roofs by an impervious moisture barrier. The impervious moisture barrier system protecting the structure supporting floors shall provide positive drainage of water that infiltrates the moisture-permeable floor topping.

The framing condition described is uncommon, but the requirement for naturally durable or preservative treated wood is appropriate. Concrete or masonry can contain sufficient moisture to raise the moisture content in supporting wood structural elements above 20 percent. Therefore, an impervious moisture barrier or naturally durable or preservative-treated wood is required.
2304.12.2.5 Ventilation beneath balcony or elevated walking surfaces. Enclosed framing in exterior balconies and elevated walking surfaces that have weather-exposed surfaces shall be provided with openings that provide a net free cross-ventilation area not less than 1/150 of the area of each separate space.

Ventilation is needed for enclosed framing in exterior balconies to allow the wood to dry in the event that moisture gets into the enclosure and into the wood. A key word is enclosed. Wherever the wood framing supporting such structures is enclosed it is more difficult for water in the assembly to dry out regardless of the source of the water (even if remaining from rain during the construction period).

2304.12.2.6 Wood in contact with the ground or fresh water. Wood used in contact with exposed earth shall be naturally durable for both decay and termite resistance or preservative treated in accordance with AWPA U1 for soil or freshwater use.

Exception: Untreated wood is permitted where such wood is continuously and entirely below the ground-water level or submerged in fresh water.

Wood that has been completely submerged below the ground-water table or in fresh water has been known to remain in good condition for many years. This method of preservation is the only exception to requiring naturally durable or preservative treated wood where it is in contact with or embedded in the ground.

2304.12.2.6.1 Posts or columns. Posts and columns that are supporting permanent structures and embedded in concrete that is exposed to the weather or in direct contact with the earth shall be of preservative-treated wood.

This requirement is similar to Section 2304.12.2.2 but emphasizes that posts and columns encased or embedded in concrete must be of preservative treated wood. The condition is generally more severe than wood placed directly on concrete or embedded in the earth. The embedded portion of the column will most likely be at a moisture content in excess of 20 percent. At some point very near where the concrete ends, the conditions will be ideal for decay—having both a high moisture content and the presence of air. Unless treated wood is used, decay will occur very near where the encasing begins.

2304.12.2.7 Termite protection. In geographical areas where hazard of termite damage is known to be very heavy, wood floor framing in the locations specified in Section 2304.12.2.1 and exposed framing of exterior decks or balconies shall

===== Page 1717 =====
be of naturally durable species (termitic resistant) or preservative treated in accordance with AWPA U1 for the species, product preservative and end use or provided with approved methods of termite protection.

This provision applies to floor framing such as posts, girders, joists and subfloor, and exposed framing of exterior decks or balconies where termite damage has been determined to be very heavy.

Soil poisoning is considered to be a more efficient method of controlling termites; however, there are obvious negative environmental implications, and some regions may forbid this method altogether. Additionally, all possible locations of infestation must be poisoned; therefore, the work should be carefully monitored and performed by professionals who are competent and understand applicable standards, laws and procedures. Under no circumstances should soil poisoning be attempted by those unfamiliar with toxic products and their application.

2304.12.2.8 Wood used in retaining walls and cribs. Wood installed in retaining or crib walls shall be preservative treated in accordance with AWPA U1 for soil and freshwater use.

Where the structure is regulated by the code, wood used to retain soil is to be preservative treated. Presumably, where the failure of the retaining wall or crib may threaten life safety or result in property damage, the durability provided by preservative-treated wood is necessary.

2304.12.3 Attic ventilation. For attic ventilation, see Section 1202.2.2.

Adequate ventilation allows moisture-laden air to readily escape from the attic space in order to avoid exposure of the framing to excessive moisture (see Section 1202.2.2 for further discussion).

2304.12.4 Under-floor ventilation (crawl space). For under-floor ventilation (crawl space), see Section 1202.4.

Enclosed spaces under floors of buildings are referred to as crawl spaces where not designed and constructed as basements. The earth is usually exposed or covered with a vapor retarder. Regardless, there is always the potential for a large amount of moisture vapor that comes from the ground to be present. This moisture must be removed to prevent wetting and drying cycles that can cause decay and fungus attack in wood members. Experience has shown that crawl spaces constructed in conformance to this section and ventilated to the exterior as required by Section 1202.4 do not develop problems of decay.
Where a high ground-water table exists or moisture is abnormally high, the crawl space must be adequately drained in accordance with SBC 303. It should be recognized that the moisture problem may be exaggerated in colder months; therefore, operable vents should be used with caution. Once insulation in such spaces becomes wet, it seldom dries out, thus negating its performance.

2304.13 Long-term loading. Wood members supporting concrete, masonry or similar materials shall be checked for the effects of long-term loading using the provisions of the ANSI/AWC NDS. The total deflection, including the effects of long-term loading, shall be limited in accordance with Section 1604.3.1 for these supported materials.

Exception: Horizontal wood members supporting masonry or concrete nonstructural floor or roof surfacing not more than 100 mm thick need not be checked for long-term loading.

It is common for wood structural elements to support masonry and concrete construction. When properly designed, taking into consideration long-term deflection, wood members can adequately support permanent dead loads of concrete and masonry. The deflection limitations on wood supporting masonry and concrete are recommended by that industry (see Section 3.5.2 and Appendix F, ANSI/AWC NDS). Masonry and concrete are brittle materials, which do not tolerate movement. Wood is hygroscopic, meaning it changes dimensions as a result of absorbing or releasing (drying) water. Dimensional changes in wood due to improper detailing can result in damage to the supported masonry and concrete.

The exception provides some relief. Flooring and roof coverings meeting specific thickness criteria may be supported by wood. The wood must be designed to carry the weight of the supported material, but it is not necessary to consider the effect of long-term loading.

Tabulated modulus of elasticity design values in the ANSI/AWC NDS are intended for the calculation of immediate deformation under load. Under sustained loading, wood members exhibit additional time-dependent formation (creep), which develops at a steady rate over time. Where dead loads or sustained live loads represent a relatively high percentage of total design load, creep is a design consideration and is handled by these provisions in the ANSI/AWC NDS. In such situations, the total deflection under long-term loading is estimated by increasing the initial deflection associated with the long-term load component by the time-

===== Page 1718 =====
dependent creep factor of 1.5 for seasoned or 2.0 for unseasoned or wet lumber or glued-laminated timber (see Section 3.5.2, ANSI/AWC NDS).

## SECTION 2305 GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR LATERAL FORCE-RESISTING SYSTEMS

2305.1 General. Structures using wood-frame shear walls or wood-frame diaphragms to resist wind, seismic or other lateral loads shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS and the applicable provisions of Sections 2305, 2306 and 2307.

General design requirements for wood-framed lateral-force-resisting systems applicable to engineered structures are described in this section. Elements discussed in this section are designed using either ASD or LRFD methodologies. Section 2305 references the AWC SDPWS for lateral design of wood structures. Since the referenced standard does not explicitly recognize the use of staples in diaphragms and shear walls, Sections 2305.2 and 2305.3 provide guidance on calculating the deflection-blocked wood structural panel diaphragms and shear walls fastened with staples.

Where portions of or elements within structures constructed according to Section 2308 need to be engineered, provisions of Section 2305 can be applied without engineering the entire structure. The extent of engineering design to be provided must be determined by the registered design professional and accepted by the building official. However, the minimum acceptable extent is often taken to be force transfer into the element, design of the element and force transfer out of the element. Where more than one braced wall line or diaphragm in any area of conventional structures requires engineering analysis, the assumptions used to develop Section 2308 may be affected, and a complete lateral analysis and design may be appropriate for the entire lateral-force-resisting system. For example, the absence of a ceiling may create a nonconventional configuration because conventional construction assumes there is a ceiling diaphragm that contributes some degree of lateral strength and stiffness.

2305.1.1 Openings in shear panels. Openings in shear panels that materially affect their strength shall be detailed on the plans and shall have their edges adequately reinforced to transfer all shearing stresses.

Openings often occur in shear walls and diaphragms to accommodate stairs, windows, doors, shafts and other purposes. The transfer of shear forces around openings must be effectively addressed in the design to ensure that adequate capacity exists around the perimeter of the opening to effectively transfer shear forces.

If one considers the various approaches to shear wall design, this provision is significant since the framing and connections around the openings are specifically designed and detailed for force transfer. In this approach, design force transfer around the openings involves developing a system of piers and coupling beams within the shear wall. Load paths for the shear and flexure developed in the piers and coupling beams generally require blocking and strapping extending from each corner of the opening to some distance beyond. This design approach is often utilized in highly loaded walls where limited amounts of sheathing are present around openings, often resulting in shear wall detailing that involves many metal tension straps around the openings. The benefit of this additional design and detailing is that the permitted height-to-width ratio of wall piers potentially allows a narrower width pier than would otherwise be required. These are referred to as "force transfer shear walls" in the AWC SDPWS.

2305.2 Diaphragm deflection. The deflection of wood frame diaphragms shall be determined in accordance with AWC SDPWS. The deflection ( \( \Delta_{dia} \) ) of a blocked wood structural panel diaphragm uniformly fastened throughout with staples is permitted to be calculated in accordance with Equation 23-1. If not uniformly fastened, the constant 1/1627 in the third term shall be modified by an approved method.

 \[ \Delta_{dia}=\frac{0.052vL^{3}}{EAW}+\frac{vL}{4Gt}+\frac{Len}{1627}+\frac{\sum(X\Delta_{c})}{2W} \quad (23-1) \]

Where:
A = Area of chord cross section, in mm².
E = Elastic modulus of chords, in N/mm².
 \( e_{n} \)  = Staple slip, in mm [see Table 2305.2(1)].
 \( G_{t} \)  = Panel rigidity through the thickness, in N/mm of panel width or depth [see Table 2305.2(2)].
L = Diaphragm length (dimension perpendicular to the direction of the applied load), mm.

v = Induced unit shear, in N/mm.
W = Diaphragm width [in the direction of applied force in mm

x = Distance from chord splice to nearest support, in mm

 \( \Delta_{c}= \)  Diaphragm chord splice slip at the induced unit shear, in mm.

 \( \Delta_{dia}= \)  Maximum mid-span diaphragm deflection determined by elastic analysis.

 \( \Delta_{dia}= \)  Maximum mid-span diaphragm deflection determined by elastic analysis.

===== Page 1719 =====
Equation 23-1 provides the estimate of the deflection of a blocked wood structural panel diaphragm that is uniformly fastened using staples. Total deflection represents the sum of four components contributing to the overall deflection: bending deflection, shear deflection, fastener slip and chord splice slip. Guidance on the selection of various equation inputs, such as fastener deformation, effective panel thickness and sum of individual chord-splice values, is provided in Table 2305.2(1) and Table 2305.2(2). These tables provide the required parameters needed in the four-part equation. For ease of calculation, the "modulus of rigidity" term (G) is combined with the "effective thickness" term (t) to form a "panel rigidity capacity" term (Gt). Capacity terms, such as Gt, are used by the panel industry in lieu of section properties and allowable stresses as it makes it easier to tabulate and compare different panel types.

The deflection computation is applicable only to blocked diaphragms.

The equation for diaphragm deflection is intended for uniform fastening. The 0.188 constant in the "fastener-slip deflection-contribution" term was derived based on the panel-edge fastener being the same for the entire length of the diaphragm. Where fastener spacing becomes less dense near the center of the diaphragm span, ATC 7 recommends that the 0.188 constant should be increased in proportion to the average load on each fastener with a nonuniform fastener spacing, compared to the average load that would be present if a uniform fastener spacing had been maintained. The adjusted constant can be expressed as follows:

 \[ 0.188x\left(\frac{V_{n}}{V_{n}}\right) \]

where

 \( V_{n}= \)  The average nonuniform load per fastener.

 \( V_{n}= \)  The average uniform load per fastener.
Table 2305.2(1) and Table 2305.2(2) contain values for the terms  \( e_{n} \) , G, and t for use in Equations 23-1 and 23-2. The source of these tabulated values is the 1997 UBC, Volume 3, which is the source for Equations 23-1 and 23-2 as well. G and t are combined into a single table that gives the panel rigidity—through—the thickness capacity, Gt, which allows the use of similar values for wood structural panels other than plywood. These values are recognized by the industry for all products meeting the criteria of either DOC PS 1 or PS 2, both of which are referenced standards in the code.

2305.3 Shear wall deflection. The deflection of wood-frame shear walls shall be determined in accordance with AWC SDPWS. The deflection ( \( \Delta_{sw} \) ) of a blocked wood structural panel shear wall uniformly fastened throughout with staples is permitted to be calculated in accordance with Equation 23-2.

 \[ \Delta_{sw}=\frac{vh^{3}}{3EAb}+\frac{vh}{Gt}+\frac{he_{n}}{407.6}+d_{a}\frac{h}{b} \quad (23-2) \]

Where,
A = Area of end-post cross section in mm².

b = Shear wall length, in mm.

 \( d_{a} \)  = Total vertical elongation of wall anchorage system (such as fastener slip, device elongation, rod elongation) at the induced unit shear in the shear wall (v) at the design shear load (v).

E = Modulus of elasticity of end posts, in N/mm².
 \( e_{n} \)  = Staple slip, in mm [see Table 2305.2(1)].

Gt = Panel rigidity through the thickness, in N/mm of panel width or depth [see Table 2305.2(2)].

h = Shear wall height, in mm.

v = Induced unit shear, in N/mm.

 \( \Delta_{sw} \)  = Maximum shear wall deflection determined by elastic analysis, in mm.

The equation in this section provides an estimate of the deflection of a blocked wood structural panel shear wall. Total deflection represents the sum of four components contributing to overall deflection: bending deflection, shear deflection, fastener slip and anchorage deformation. Guidance is provided in Table 2305.2(1) and Table 2305.2(2), which provide the required parameters needed for the four-part equation. For ease of calculation, the "modulus of rigidity" term (G) was combined with the "effective thickness" term (t) to form a "panel rigidity capacity" term (Gt). Capacity terms such as Gt are used by the panel industry in lieu of section properties and allowable stresses as it makes it easier to tabulate and compare different panel types.

## SECTION 2306 ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN

2306.1 Allowable stress design. The design and construction of wood elements in structures using allowable stress design shall be in accordance with the applicable standards listed in Table 2306.1.

This section contains a number of specifications intended to provide guidance to nonprofessional as well as professional users of the code. These specifications, based on accepted engineering practices and experiences, are considered to be the minimum acceptable methods for design and construction of wood elements in structures. When designed and built in accordance with the standards referenced in this section, a building or structure is deemed to comply with the code. These standards contain most of the information needed to adequately design a

===== Page 1720 =====
structure in accordance with the Allowable Stress Design (ASD) method. It is necessary for the designer to have a working knowledge of wood engineering principles to properly interpret these recommendations and meet the provisions of other applicable sections of the code.

The most common and applicable practices are summarized in the standards listed in Section 2306.1. These standards contain references to additional technical publications that address special problems and design criteria for wood structures. The users of these standards should have training and expertise in engineering and construction in order to properly interpret the standards' requirements. These standards employ ASD—the traditional format for presenting safety checking equations in structural design standards. The basis of ASD is that actual working stresses resulting from specified service loads are compared to allowable stresses. Members and connections are selected so that actual stresses do not exceed allowable stresses.

While providing life safety by preventing structural failure or collapse remains the primary purpose of structural design, the designer must also consider how the design will perform from the perspectives of serviceability, durability and fire safety. Serviceability limit states are those that restrict the normal use and occupancy of the structure, such as excessive deflection and vibration. The code establishes deflection limits as a ratio of the member span; for example, L/360 computed under live load or L/240 under total load (dead plus live) for floor members (see Section 1604.3).

The ANSI/AWC NDS is promulgated and distributed by the AWC. The ANSI/AWC NDS was first adopted in 1944 and has been updated periodically to reflect new knowledge under the auspices of AWC and its predecessor organizations, the National Lumber Manufacturers Association (NLMA) and the National Forest Products Association. The ANSI/AWC NDS is now published in a dual format, meaning it allows both ASD and LRFD methods.

AWC also publishes Wood Construction Data (WCD) No. 5, Heavy Timber Construction Details. It is written in code language for easy reference. WCD No. 5 contains detailed specifications for sizes of members required and other provisions that collectively provide a definition of "Heavy timber construction." Recommendations are also included for the fabrication and erection of this unique construction. It should be used in conjunction with the NDS and American Institute of Timber Construction (AITC) specifications where the members are glued laminated.

The Supplement to the National Design Specification is a collation of the reference design values for wood construction. The reference design values for sawn lumber are as published by seven grade-rules-writing agencies: National Lumber Grades Authority (Canada), Northern Softwood Lumber Bureau, Northeastern Lumber Manufacturers Association, Redwood Inspection Bureau, Southern Pine Inspection Bureau, West Coast Lumber Inspection Bureau and Western Wood Products Association.

DOC PS 20 requires that design values for visually graded lumber be developed in accordance with appropriate ASTM standards or other technically sound criteria. The design values reflected in the NDS Supplement are derived from ASTM D1990, which is utilized to derive strength values from full-sized samples of lumber.

Design values for visually graded timbers, decking and some species and grades of dimension lumber are based on the provisions of ASTM D245. The methods in ASTM D245 involve adjusting the strength properties of small clear specimens of wood for the effects of knots, slope of grain, splits, checks, size, duration of load, moisture content and other influencing factors to obtain design values applicable to normal conditions of service. The NDS Supplement also contains reference design values for structural glued-laminated timber from AITC and APA - The Engineered Wood Association in accordance with principles established by the U.S. Forest Products Laboratory standards. These involve adjustment of strength properties to account for specific factors such as knots, grain slope, density, member size and the number of laminations.

The design values given in the supplement are for normal loading conditions and under dry service conditions in a covered building. If other conditions of loadings or wet end-use conditions exist, these values must be adjusted in accordance with the recommendations of the NDS.

The American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers (ASABE) is an educational and scientific organization dedicated to the advancement of engineering applicable to agricultural, food and biological systems.

APA—The Engineered Wood Association's recommendations and design standards are considered to provide the best criteria for the design and construction of structures

===== Page 1721 =====
incorporating plywood and other wood structural panel products.

TPI 1 is the standard for the design, fabrication, quality control and erection of light-frame metal-plate-connected wood trusses. The standard was prepared through a joint effort by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and TPI. This standard should be used in conjunction with other standards for wood construction.

The AITC standards listed are primarily intended for glued-laminated structural members, but also include recommendations for sawn timber members. These standards supplement the provisions of the ANSI/AWC NDS and WCD No. 5 with no conflicting provisions. All the standards should be used collectively.

Commentary Figure 2306.1 shows an example of an AITC certificate of conformance for a glue laminated timber.

2306.1.1 Joists and rafters. The design of rafter spans is permitted to be in accordance with the AWC STJR.

Spans for joists and rafters may be designed in accordance with the AWC Span Tables for Joists and Rafters or approved engineering standards. Where sizes of joists or rafters are other than standard sizes conforming to DOC PS 20, they must be designed in accordance with the ANSI/AWC NDS. When approved, other span tables may be used, such as those from the IRC, Southern Forest Products Association, Western Wood Products Association and Canadian Wood Council. The spans given in these tables are the same as those published in AWC Span Tables for Joists and Rafters. The AWC span tables were developed to provide uniformity in use of wood joists and rafters for light wood-framed structures where the live and dead loads do not exceed those for which the tables were designed. The tables for joists and rafters were designed with the live load, dead load and deflection criteria shown in Chapter 16.

2306.1.2 Plank and beam flooring. The design of plank and beam flooring is permitted to be in accordance with the AWC Wood Construction Data No. 4.

The plank-and-beam method for framing floors and roofs has been used in buildings for many years. The adaptation of this system to residential construction has raised technical issues concerning details of application. AWC's Plank and Beam Framing for Residential Buildings, Wood Construction Data No. 4 contains information pertaining to design principles, advantages and limitations, construction details and structural requirements for the plank-and-beam method of framing.

The allowable unit stresses for preservative-treated wood need not be adjusted for treatment, but are subject to other adjustments. The allowable unit stresses for fire-retardant-treated wood, including fastener values, shall be developed from an approved method of investigation that considers the effects of anticipated temperature and humidity to which the fire-retardant-treated wood will be subjected, the type of treatment and the redrying process. Other adjustments are applicable except that the impact load duration shall not apply.

* Allowable unit stresses for preservative-treated wood do not need to be adjusted for treatment, but they are subject to other adjustments as required by the ANSI/AWC NDS. The allowable stresses for fire-retardant-treated wood products must be determined by testing that takes into account anticipated temperatures and humidity levels that will be encountered during service. The allowable stresses for untreated products are not applicable to fire-retardant-treated products because the treatment chemicals can reduce the strength of the materials. This is particularly true for products, such as roof sheathing, that can be subjected to conditions of high temperature and humidity. Before approving the use of fire-retardant-treated wood products, the building official should require the manufacturer of each subject product to submit its recommended allowable stresses and provide documentation on how those values were determined. This documentation should be required for each chemical that is to be used because performance will vary between formulations. Some manufacturers maintain ICC Evaluation Service Reports for their products which can be used by the engineer and building official to design and approve these products. Additionally, the building official should enforce any restriction on the use and location of any such treated product recommended by the manufacturer or justified based on the nature of the testing performed. For example, where these products are proposed for use in attics, the building official should make sure that they have been tested under conditions of high temperature and humidity comparable to the actual conditions that can occur in attics. The building official should also be alerted to the fact that the ventilation requirement in the code takes on added importance where such products are used in attics. Ventilation requirements should be strictly enforced, and the building official should consult the manufacturer to determine if

===== Page 1722 =====
any additional ventilation above the code requirements might be necessary. Ventilation is needed to control temperature and humidity levels to which the products will be subjected. A lack of adequate ventilation can change the service conditions to which the products are subjected and, as a result, reduce the strength of the products below the values published by the manufacturer.

2306.1.4 Lumber Decking. The capacity of lumber decking arranged according to the patterns described in Section 2304.9.2 shall be the lesser of the capacities determined for moment and deflection according to the formulas in Table 2306.1.4.

Based on the decking layup patterns in Section 2304.9.2, the applicable equations for computing allowable uniform loads limited by moment and deflection are selected from this table. Note that the allowable loading will be the most restrictive value based on bending stresses and deflection limits. The units are not specified in the equation but do need to be consistent when carrying out the load computation.

Table 2306.1.4 provides the allowable total uniform loads for lumber decking limited by moment or deflection.

2306.2 Wood-frame diaphragms. Wood-frame diaphragms shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. Where panels are fastened to framing members with staples, requirements and limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear values set forth in Table 2306.2(1) or Table 2306.2(2) shall be permitted. The allowable shear values in Table 2306.2(1) and Table 2306.2(2) are permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design.

Diaphragms constructed of wood structural panels or diagonal lumber sheathing must be designed in accordance with the AWC SDPWS. Wood structural panel diaphragms fastened with staples may be designed using the values given in Table 2306.2(1) and Table 2306.2(2). A diaphragm is a relatively thin structural element (e.g., a floor or roof assembly), usually rectangular in plan and capable of resisting shear in its plane and parallel to its edges. The three major elements of a diaphragm are the sheathing (wood structural panels), web members (joists/rafters), the chords (boundary members) and the fasteners (such as nails).

Most floors, roofs and walls can function as diaphragms in distributing lateral (wind or seismic) forces to the vertical resisting elements, such as shear walls. Full diaphragm action can be obtained by detailing the sheathing fasteners and framing connections. Diaphragm construction is used extensively to resist horizontal forces of wind and earthquakes. Diaphragms may be either vertical (often referred to as "shear walls") or horizontal. In special designs, they may be oriented in any direction. A diaphragm acts in a similar manner as an I-beam. The wood structural panel skin acts as the web and the boundary members act as the flanges, which are called diaphragm chords. However, due to the relatively greater depth of a diaphragm, the reactions to stress are somewhat different. The diaphragm design assumes that stresses are uniformly distributed across the panel and the web does not contribute to the resistance of tension and compression stresses as it does in a shallow beam.

A series of diaphragms may be tied together to develop a very rigid structure. Their ability to resist large shear stresses has led to their use in innovative construction methods, such as folded plate roof elements, geodesic domes and space frames.

Diaphragms must be securely connected to supporting members and to foundations that are capable of resisting all design forces. Anchorage for floors and roofs should be detailed, but generally presents no special problems. It is required that the stresses be transferred to the chords, which should be adequately supported. Shear walls, however, often require special attention to their anchorage at the foundation. The foundation and the connections thereto must be designed to resist the uplift, compression and shear forces applied.

Openings in diaphragms such as skylights, doors and windows disrupt the uniform distribution of shear stresses across the diaphragm. Provisions must be made for continuity and compensation for this disruption. For instance, reinforcement may be necessary at windows.

As noted, wood structural panel diaphragms should be in accordance with the AWC SDPWS or may be designed using the information in Table 2306.2(1) or Table 2306.2(2). Note that the panel thickness and joint spacings must also comply with the requirements for sheathing of floors and roofs. The AWC SDPWS allows wood structural panel diaphragms to be designed using accepted engineering principles. ANSI/AWC NDS provides information on shear resistance of mechanical fasteners and chord design. Working stresses for wood structural panels and other materials are contained in other references in the code.

The design of horizontal diaphragms to resist shear stresses is also dependent on the

===== Page 1723 =====
orientation of continuous panel joints relative to the direction of load and not on the direction of the long dimension of the panel or framing. Six cases of panel orientation are illustrated in Table 2306.2(1). The fastening schedule and the resultant shear resistance will be affected by the panel layout (relative to load) selected. A diaphragm usually must resist loads in both transverse and longitudinal directions. Each direction must be considered separately with a different case of panel orientation; thus, the allowable load will be applicable to each direction.

Blocked diaphragms have all panel edges, including the continuous panel joint, supported by and fastened to framing members. Blocking is used at the edges of panels that are not over joists to provide for connecting units and to assist in the transfer of shear forces to the adjacent panel. Unblocked diaphragms may be used, provided the applicable fastening schedule in Table 2304.9.1 is used and the design shear does not exceed that allowed for unblocked diaphragms in Table 2306.2(1). Unblocked diaphragms are often controlled by the buckling of the panel (skin). With the same fastener spacing, allowable design loads for blocked diaphragms are one and one-half to two times the design loads for unblocked diaphragms. In addition, the maximum loads for which blocked diaphragms may be designed are many times greater. The lateral forces and design shear that must be resisted by the diaphragm usually serve as the basis for choosing whether to use blocked or unblocked diaphragm construction.

The values given in the tables are for seismic and may be increased 40 percent for wind loads. The original diaphragm and shear wall tables were developed in the 1960s when code-prescribed wind and seismic loads were quite different than they are today. In recent reevaluation of the tabulated values, it was determined that they were too low for wind design purposes because code-prescribed wind loads have been refined over the years and the confidence level in their accuracy is high. Because the tables use a 2.8 factor of safety, it was determined that a 2 factor of safety is adequate for wind design, which resulted in a 40-percent increase in the tabulated values. In the diaphragm tables in the AWC SDPWS, the nominal unit shear capacities for wind loads are shown in a different column than seismic loads and the wind capacities are 40 percent higher than the seismic capacities.

Design values for nailed diaphragms are given in the AWC SDPWS. Table 2306.2(1) gives allowable shear values for wood structural panel diaphragms fastened with staples. The table's fifth column specifies the minimum nominal width of framing members at adjoining panel edges and boundaries. Note that 75 mm framing has higher shear capacities than the 50 mm framing. The intent is to provide thicker framing where the fastener size, spacing or number of rows at adjoining panel edges, or boundaries, is dictated. The purpose of using larger framing at these locations is to allow the specified connection details to transfer the higher shear forces from one panel to the next without splitting the framing members. No matter what the edge or boundary fastening requirement is for a specific panel, the minimum fastening requirement at intermediate framing (framing that does not support a panel edge) is always a single row of fasteners at 150 or 300 mm o.c., as this "field nailing" connection is not part of the shear transfer system between panels. As such, from a shear-transfer perspective, there is no reason to use the "at adjoining panel edges" framing requirements at intermediate framing locations. The normal (usually 2x) framing specified for the vertical load or other engineering considerations is sufficient at the intermediate framing locations.

Because the table values are based on Douglas Fir-Larch or Southern Pine, Note a specifies the adjustment factors to be applied where other species of framing lumber are used.

Note f clarifies the calculation method required to convert table values for applications other than seismic or wind loading. These adjustments reflect the fact that the values in the tables have a built-in load duration factor (LDF) of 1.6. As such, to convert to a normal load duration (LDF = 1.0), the tabular value must be multiplied by 0.63 (1.0/1.6 = 0.63), and to convert to a permanent load duration (LDF = 0.90), a factor of 0.56 must be used (0.91/1.6 = 0.56).

Note d requires staples to be installed with the crowns of the staple parallel to the long dimension of the framing members. This makes the installation requirement for staples consistent with past practice for staples used in wood-framed diaphragms as required by the National Evaluation Report (NER-272) issued by the National Evaluation Service, Inc.

Figure 2306.2(1) provides drawings for identification of cases 1 through 6 for use with Table 2306.2(1).

As Commentary Figure 2306.2(1) illustrates, splitting occurs parallel to the grain, so staggering the fasteners helps alleviate this problem. Notes c and d address the concern of splitting of framing members where tighter

===== Page 1724 =====
fastener spacing is specified. Commentary Figure 2306.2(2) illustrates staggered nailing that meets the intent of these footnotes (see commentary, Section 2306.2).

This table contains values for stapled wood structural panel diaphragm assemblies that have higher capacities compared to those of Table 2306.2(1). These high-load diaphragms can be useful for larger flat-roofed structures subjected to high wind or seismic loads. The figures that accompany the table illustrate typical nailing patterns at panel joints. Note g requires high-load diaphragms to have special inspection in accordance with Section 1705. The capacities reflected in this table are based on calculations using the European Yield Method and were also confirmed by testing [also see commentary, Table 2306.2(1)].

Figure 2306.2(2) provides fastener spacing diagrams for use with Table 2306.2(2).

Gypsum board diaphragm

ceilings. Gypsum board diaphragm ceilings shall be in accordance with Section 2508.6.
See the commentary to Section 2508.6.
2306.3 Wood-frame shear walls. Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. Where panels are fastened to framing members with staples, requirements and limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear values set forth in Table 2306.3(1), Table 2306.3(2) or Table 2306.3(3) shall be permitted. The allowable shear values in Table 2306.3(1) and Table 2306.3(2) are permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design. Panels complying with ANSI/APA PRP-210 shall be permitted to use design values for Plywood Siding in the AWC SDPWS.

Shear walls constructed of wood framing must be designed in accordance with the AWC SDPWS. The AWC SDPWS contains provisions for design of shear walls using wood structural panels, particleboard, structural fiberboard, gypsum wall board, Portland cement plaster (stucco) and lumber sheathing. Although wood structural panel sheathed shear walls are most prevalently used today, diagonally sheathed lumber shear walls are still used for new construction in some regions and are encountered in the alteration of existing structures. Wood structural panel, structural fiberboard, gypsum board and Portland cement plaster shear walls fastened with staples may be designed using the values given in Table 2306.3(1), Table 2306.3(2) and Table 2306.3(3). As with diaphragms, the allowable shear values for wood structural panel and fiberboard sheathed shear walls may be increased by 40 percent for wind loads (see commentary, Section 2306.2).
The allowable shear capacities for wood structural panel shear walls in Table 2306.3(1) were developed based on engineering principles and monotonic testing. The AWC SDPWS allows shear walls to be designed without limitations by a rational method using either the values for nail strength in the ANSI/AWC NDS or wood structural panel design properties in APA's Panel Design Specification. For shear walls utilizing wood framing subjected to seismic loading, energy dissipation is almost entirely due to nail bending. Where shear design values exceed 475 N/m, Note g requires that all framing members receiving edge fastening from abutting panels must be a single 75 mm nominal member in Seismic Design Category D, E or F. A pair of nominal 50 mm members can be used in lieu of a single 75 mm nominal member, provided the two 51 mm members are fastened together to transfer the design shear. This provision is based on testing by APA, which showed that two 50 mm members fastened to transfer the shear performed as well as shear walls with a single 75 mm nominal member. See the commentary to Table 2306.2(1) for additional discussion of the notes.

Fiberboard sheathed shear walls fastened with staples may be designed using Table 2306.3(2). The table is restricted to Type V buildings as defined in Chapter 6. Note e limits the use of fiberboard shear walls to buildings in Seismic Design Categories A, B and C.

The Table 2306.3(3) provides the shear capacities of gypsum board sheathing, expanded metal or woven wire lath and Portland cement plaster in shear walls fastened with staples. Because of the brittleness of these materials, they are not permitted to resist seismic forces imposed by masonry or concrete walls and their use is limited to structures classified as Seismic Design Category D. They are prohibited in structures classified as Seismic Design Category E or F (see Table 12.2-1 SBC 301). In wind design, the shear capacities of these materials can be added to the shear capacity of the wood structural panel or wood sheathing to determine the total shear capacity of the shear wall to resist wind forces (see AWC SDPWS).

Note f requires staples to be installed with the crown of the staple parallel to the long dimension of the framing members. This makes the installation requirement for staples consistent with what has been required for staples used in wood-framed diaphragms and shear walls.

===== Page 1725 =====
## SECTION 2307 LOAD AND RESISTANCE FACTOR DESIGN

2307.1 Load and resistance factor design. The design and construction of wood elements and structures using load and resistance factor design shall be in accordance with ANSI/AWC NDS and AWC SDPWS.

The LRFD methodology that was originally developed for ASCE 16-95 was subsequently incorporated into the ANSI/AWC NDS and SDPWS. The current edition of the ANSI/AWC NDS is a dual format specification that contains provisions for both ASD and LRFD. Theoretical reliability-based analysis has been used for many years in the electronics and aerospace industries with great success. LRFD has evolved to become the preferred format for converting structural design standards to a so-called limit states approach.

## SECTION 2308 CONVENTIONAL LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION

2308.1 General. The requirements of this section are intended for conventional light-frame construction. Other construction methods are permitted to be used, provided a satisfactory design is submitted showing compliance with other provisions of this code. Because of its limited use it is deemed inapplicable to Saudi Arabia. It is permitted to consult SBC 201 Section 2308 if needed.

The provisions of Section 2308 recognize that light-frame wood construction for a limited range of buildings will perform to the extent required by the code based on many years of experience and good historical performance.

The conventional construction provisions have always been entirely prescriptive and were intended to apply to repetitive light-wood framing, such as the stud walls, joists and rafters, along with the foundations that support the structure.

Although prescriptive methods have been followed ever since wood has been used as a building material, in 1990 the Conventional Construction Task Force of the Structural Engineers Association of California (SEAOC) was formed for the purpose of reviewing existing code provisions and construction practices in order to develop better and more uniformly enforceable provisions. This work was integrated into the 1994 UBC and much of it remains in the code today.

These provisions are generally only applicable to light wood-framed building construction having closely spaced repetitive framing.

Given that these provisions are prescriptive, they do not typically require a structural design to comply with the code. However, structures, portions of structures or elements not within the scope of conventional construction are permitted, provided that they are designed to comply with either ASD or LRFD methodology, as discussed in the commentary to Section 2302.1. Methods other than those prescribed by the section are allowed where a design is submitted and approved by the building official. Structures must either comply with the restrictions, limitations and requirements prescribed in the conventional construction provisions or documentation is to be provided that demonstrates compliance with other provisions of the code and accepted engineering practice. Generally, accepted engineering practice means an engineered analysis has been done based on well-established principles of mechanics and the analysis conforms to accepted principles, tests or nationally recognized standards. In the case of unusual configurations, weight or loading conditions that exceed the prescriptive limitations, the code requires a structural design.

## SECTION 2309 WOOD FRAME CONSTRUCTION MANUAL

2309.1 Wood Frame Construction Manual. Structural design in accordance with the AWC WFCM shall be permitted for buildings assigned to Risk Category I or II subject to the limitations of Section 1.1.3 of the AWC WFCM and the load assumptions contained therein. Structural elements beyond these limitations shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice.

The AWC Wood Framed Construction Manual (WFCM) is an ANSI consensus standard that contains both engineering criteria and engineered prescriptive provisions for wood frame construction. It is developed by technical committees organized by the American Wood Council. This section states that the AWC WFCM may be used for buildings that fit within the WFCM's applicability limits for building size, configuration and loads as set out in Section 1.1.3 of the standard. While WFCM provisions are intended primarily for detached one-and two-family dwellings due to the floor live load assumption associated with those occupancies, many of the WFCM provisions for specific geographic wind and seismic may remain applicable for other buildings. For example, wind provisions for sizing of roof sheathing, wall sheathing, fastening schedule, uplift straps, shear anchorage, shear wall lengths and wall studs for out of plane wind loads are included in WFCM and are applicable for other use groups within the load limitations of the WFCM tables. Similarly, roof rafter size and spacing, and shear wall lengths and

===== Page 1726 =====
anchorage for seismic are applicable within the load limitations of the WFCM tables. Applications outside the scope of the WFCM tabulated requirements must be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice.

===== Page 1727 =====
## Bibliography

The following resource materials were used in the preparation of the commentary for this chapter of the code:

1 AWC, ASD/LRFD Manual for Engineered Wood Construction (ASD/LRFD Manual). Leesburg, VA: American Wood Council, 2005.

2 AWC Heavy Timber Construction—Wood Construction Data 5. Leesburg, VA: American Wood Council, 2003.

3 ANSI/AWC NDS-15, National Design Specification for Wood Construction with 2015 Supplement. Leesburg, VA: American Wood Council, 2015.

4 AWC SDPWS-15, Special Design Provisions for Wind and Seismic. Leesburg, VA: American Wood Council, 2015.

5 AWC STJR-15 Span Tables for Joists and Rafters. Leesburg, VA: American Wood Council, 2015.

6 AWC WCD 5-04, Heavy Timber Construction Details. Leesburg, VA: American Wood Council, 2004.

7 AWC WFCM-15, Wood Frame Construction Manual for One-and Two-family Dwellings (WFCM). Leesburg, VA: American Wood Council, 2015.

8 ANSI/AITC A 190.1-12, Structural Glued-laminated Timber. Englewood, CO: American Institute of Timber Construction, 2012.

9 ANSI/A 190.1-12, Structural Glued-laminated Timber. Tacoma, WA: APA—Engineered Wood Association, 2012.

10 APA Report 157-96, Wood Structural Panel Shear Walls with Gypsum Wallboard and Window/Door Openings. Tacoma, WA: APA—The Engineered Wood Association, 1996.

11 APA Research Report 138, Plywood Diaphragms. Tacoma, WA: APA—Engineered Wood Association.

12 APA Research Report 154, Wood Structural Panel Shear Wall. Tacoma, WA: APA—Engineered Wood Association.

13 ASCE 7-10, Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures with Supplement No. 1. Reston, VA: American Society of Civil Engineers, 2010.

14 ASTM C208-12, Specification for Cellulose Fiber Insulating Board. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2012.

15 ASTM D245-06, Standard Practice for Establishing Structural Grades and Related Allowable Properties for Visually Graded Lumber. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2006.

16 ASTM D5055-13, Specification for Establishing and Monitoring Structural Capacities of Prefabricated Wood I-Joists. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2013.

17 ASTM F1667-11AE1, Specification for Drive Fasteners: Nails, Spikes and Staples. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2011.

18 ATC 7, Guidelines for the Design of Horizontal Wood Diaphragms. Redwood City, CA: Applied Technology Council, 1981.

19 BCSI 1-08, Guide to Good Practice for Handling, Installing and Bracing of Metal Plate Connected Wood Trusses. Madison, WI: Wood Truss Council of America (WTCA) & Truss Plate Institute (TPI), 2008.

20 FEMA 450, Part 1, NEHRP Recommended Provisions for Seismic Regulations for New Buildings and Other Structures. Washington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2004.

21 FEMA 450, Part 2, NEHRP Recommended Provisions for Seismic Regulations for New Buildings and Other Structures Part 2: Commentary. Washington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2004.

22 ICC-ES, Acceptance Criteria for Staples (AC 201). Whittier, CA: ICC Evaluation Service, Inc., 2005, 2008.

23 Recommended Lateral Force Requirements and Commentary (SEAOC Blue Book). Sacramento, CA: Structural Engineers Association of California, 1999.

24 SEAOC Blue Book: Seismic Design Recommendations of the SEAOC Seismology Committee. Sacramento, CA: Structural Engineers Association of California, 2006.

25 TPI 1-14, National Design Standard for Metal Plate Connected Wood Trusses Construction. Alexandria, VA: Truss Plate Institute, 2014.

===== Page 1728 =====
## TABLES AND FIGURES OF CHAPTER 23

TABLE 2304.6.1

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN WIND SPEED,  \( V_{asd} \)  PERMITTED FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL WALL SHEATHING USED TO RESIST WIND PRESSURES \( ^{a,b,c} \)

<table><td colspan="2">MINIMUM NAIL<td rowspan="2">MINIMUM WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL SPAN RATING<td rowspan="2">MINIMUM NOMINAL PANEL THICKNESS (mm)<td rowspan="2">MAXIMUM WALL STUD SPACING (mm)<td rowspan="2">PANEL NAIL SPACING<td colspan="3">MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN WIND SPEED,  \( V_{asd} \)  d (m/s)SizePenetration (mm)Edges (mm)Field (mm)Wind exposure category<td rowspan="2">6d common (51 mm × 2.8 mm)<td rowspan="2">37.5600/09.40400150300494038600/40021.90400150300494440<td rowspan="2">8d common (65 mm x 3.3 mm)<td rowspan="2">43.75<td rowspan="2">600/400<td rowspan="2">10.90<td rowspan="2">400<td rowspan="2">150300675549300675549a. Panel strength axis shall be parallel or perpendicular to supports. Three-ply plywood sheathing with studs spaced more than 400 mm on center shall be applied with panel strength axis perpendicular to supports.b. The table is based on wind pressures acting toward and away from building surfaces in accordance with Section 30.7 of SBC 301. Lateral requirements shall be in accordance with Section 2305 or 2308.c. Wood structural panels with span ratings of wall-400 or wall-600 shall be permitted as an alternative to panels with a 600/0 span rating. Plywood siding rated 400 on center or 600 on center shall be permitted as an alternative to panels with a 600/400 span rating. Wall-400 and plywood siding 400 on center shall be used with studs spaced a maximum of 400 mm on center.</table>

a. Panel strength axis shall be parallel or perpendicular to supports. Three-ply plywood sheathing with studs spaced more than 400 mm on center shall be applied with panel strength axis perpendicular to supports.

b. The table is based on wind pressures acting toward and away from building surfaces in accordance with Section 30.7 of SBC 301. Lateral requirements shall be in accordance with Section 2305 or 2308.

c. Wood structural panels with span ratings of wall-400 or wall-600 shall be permitted as an alternative to panels with a 600/0 span rating. Plywood siding rated 400 on center or 600 on center shall be permitted as an alternative to panels with a 600/400 span rating. Wall-400 and plywood siding 400 on center shall be used with studs spaced a maximum of 400 mm on center.

d.  \( V_{asd} \)  shall be determined in accordance with Section 1609.3.1.

TABLE 2304.8(1)

ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR LUMBER FLOOR AND ROOF SHEATHING

<table><td rowspan="3">SPAN (mm)<td colspan="4">MINIMUM NET THICKNESS (mm) OF LUMBER PLACED<td colspan="2">Perpendicular to supports<td colspan="2">Diagonally to supportsSurfaced dry \( ^{a} \)Surfaced unseasonedSurfaced dry \( ^{a} \)Surfaced unseasoned<td colspan="5">Floors60018.8019.5018.8019.5040015.6017.2015.6017.20<td colspan="5">Roofs60015.6017.2018.8019.50</table>

a. Maximum 19-percent moisture content.

TABLE 2304.8(2)

SHEATHING LUMBER, MINIMUM GRADE REQUIREMENTS: BOARD GRADE

<table>SOLID FLOOR OR ROOF SHEATHINGSPACED ROOF SHEATHINGGRADING RULESUtilityStandardNLGA, WCLIB, WWPA4 common or utility3 common or standardNLGA, WCLIB, WWPA, NSLB or NELMANo. 3No. 2SPIBMerchantableConstruction commonRIS</table>

===== Page 1729 =====
TABLE 2304.8(3)

ALLOWABLE SPANS AND LOADS FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL SHEATHING AND SINGLE-FLOOR GRADES CONTINUOUS OVER TWO OR MORE SPANS WITH STRENGTH AXIS PERPENDICULAR TO SUPPORTS

<table><td colspan="2">SHEATHING GRADES<td colspan="5">ROOFbFLOORc<td rowspan="2">Panel span rating roof/ floor span<td rowspan="2">Panel thickness (mm)<td colspan="3">Maximum span (mm)<td colspan="2">Loadc(kN/m²)<td rowspan="2">Maximum span (mm)With edge supportfWithout edge supportTotal loadLive load400/09.404004001.901.440500/09.405005001.901.440600/09.40,10.90,12.50600500f1.901.440600/40010.90,12.506006002.401.90400800/40011.70,12.50,15.608007001.901.444001000/50014.80,15.60,18.80,21.9010008001.901.44500g,h1200/60018,18.80,21.9012009002.151.676001350/80021.90,25135010002.151.678001500/80021.90,28.10150012002.151.67800<td colspan="8">SINGLE FLOOR GRADES<td rowspan="2">Panel span rating<td rowspan="2">Panel thickness (mm)<td colspan="5">ROOFbFLOORcWith edge supportfWithout edge supportTotal loadLive loadMaximum span (mm)400 o.c.12.50,14.80,15.606006002.151.90400g500 o.c.14.80,15.60,18.808008001.901.44500g,h600 o.c.18,18.8012009001.601.20600800 o.c.21.90,25120010002.151.908001200 o.c.27.30,28.10150012002.151.901200</table>

a. Applies to panels 600 mm or wider.

b. Uniform load deflection limitations 1/180 of span under live load plus dead load, 1/240 under live load only.

c. Panel edges shall have approved tongue-and-groove joints or shall be supported with blocking unless 6.3 mm minimum thickness underlayment or 37.5 mm of approved cellular or lightweight concrete is placed over the subfloor, or finish floor is 18.8 mm wood strip. Allowable uniform load based on deflection of 1/360 of span is 5 kN/m² except the span rating of 1200 mm on center is based on a total load of 3.10 kN/m².

d. Allowable load at maximum span.

e. Tongue-and-groove edges, panel edge clips (one midway between each support, except two equally spaced between supports 1200 mm on center), lumber blocking or other. Only lumber blocking shall satisfy blocked diaphragm requirements.

f. For 12.5 mm panel, maximum span shall be 600 mm.

g. Span is permitted to be 600 mm on center where 18.8 mm wood strip flooring is installed at right angles to joist.

h. Span is permitted to be 600 mm on center for floors where 37.50 mm of cellular or lightweight concrete is applied over the panels.

===== Page 1730 =====
TABLE 2304.8(4)

ALLOWABLE SPAN FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL COMBINATION SUBFLOOR-UNDERLAYMENT (SINGLE FLOOR)

(PANELS CONTINUOUS OVER TWO OR MORE SPANS AND STRENGTH AXIS PERPENDICULAR TO SUPPORTS)

<table><td rowspan="2">IDENTIFICATION<td colspan="6">MAXIMUM SPACING OF JOISTS (mm)4005006008001200Species group \( ^{b} \)<td colspan="6">Thickness (mm)112.515.6018———2, 315.61821.9———418.821.925———Single floor span rating \( ^{c} \)400 o.c.500 o.c.600 o.c.800 o.c.1200 o.c.</table>

a. Spans limited to value shown because of possible effects of concentrated loads. Allowable uniform loads based on deflection of  \( 1/360 \)  of span is  \( 4.80  kN/m^{2} \)  except allowable total uniform load for 28.1 mm wood structural panels over joints spaced 1200 mm on center is  \( 3.10  kN/m^{2} \) . Panel edges shall have approved tongue-and-groove joints or shall be supported with blocking, unless 6.3 mm minimum thickness underlayment or 37.5 mm of approved cellular or lightweight concrete is placed over the subfloor, or finish floor is 18.80 mm wood strip.

b. Applicable to all grades of sanded exterior-type plywood. See DOC PS 1 for plywood species groups.

c. Applicable to Underlayment grade, C-C (Plugged) plywood, and Single Floor grade wood structural panels.

TABLE 2304.8(5)

ALLOWABLE LOAD (kN/M²) FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL ROOF SHEATHING CONTINUOUS OVER TWO OR MORE SPANS AND STRENGTH AXIS PARALLEL TO SUPPORTS

(Plywood structural panels are five-ply, five-layer unless otherwise noted) \( ^{a} \)

<table><td rowspan="2">PANEL GRADE<td rowspan="2">THICKNESS (mm)<td rowspan="2">MAXIMUM SPAN (mm)<td colspan="2">LOAD AT MAXIMUM SPAN (kN/m²)LiveTotal<td rowspan="4">Structural I sheathing21.906000.951.4411.706001.65 \( ^{b} \)2.15 \( ^{b} \)12.506001.90 \( ^{b} \)2.40 \( ^{b} \)14.80, 7.806003.553.8518, 18.806004.304.80<td rowspan="6">Sheathing, other grades covered in DOC PS 1 or DOC PS 210.904501.902.4011.706000.951.2012.506001.201.4414.806001.90 \( ^{b} \)2.40 \( ^{b} \)15.606002.15 \( ^{b} \)2.65 \( ^{b} \)18, 18.806002.85 \( ^{b} \)3.10 \( ^{b} \)</table>

a. Uniform load deflection limitations 1/180 of span under live load plus dead load, 1/240 under live load only. Edges shall be blocked with lumber or other approved type of edge supports.

b. For composite and four-ply plywood structural panel, load shall be reduced by 0.72 kN/m².

===== Page 1731 =====
TABLE 2304.9.3.2

FASTENING SCHEDULE FOR MECHANICALLY LAMINATED DECKING USING LAMINATIONS OF 50 mm NOMINAL THICKNESS

<table><td rowspan="2">MINIMUM NAIL SIZE (Length x Diameter) (mm)<td colspan="3">MAXIMUM SPACING BETWEEN FACE NAILS a,b (mm)<td rowspan="2">NUMBER OF TOENAILS INTO SUPPORTS cDecking Supports ≤ 1200 mm o.c.Decking Supports &gt; 1200 mm o.c.100 x 4.87504501100 x 46003502100 x 3.7550325287.5 x 4500300287.5 x 3.7475275287.5 x 3.38425250275 x 3.7275175275 x 3.2225125268.75 x 3.7250150268.75 x 3.275225150368.75 x 32001253</table>

a. Nails shall be driven perpendicular to the lamination face, alternating between top and bottom edges.

b. Where nails penetrate through two laminations and into the third, they shall be staggered one-third of the spacing in adjacent laminations. Otherwise, nails shall be staggered one-half of the spacing in adjacent laminations.

c. Where supports are 1200 mm on center or less, alternate laminations shall be toenailed to alternate supports; where supports are spaced more than 1200 mm on center, alternate laminations shall be toenailed to every support.

===== Page 1732 =====
TABLE 2304.10.2 FASTENING SCHEDULE

<table>DESCRIPTION OF BUILDING ELEMENTSNUMBER AND TYPE OF FASTENERSPACING AND LOCATION<td colspan="3">Roof1. Blocking between ceiling joists, rafters or trusses to top plate or other framing below4-8d box (65 mm x 2.8 mm); or3-8d common (65 mm × 3.3 mm); or3-10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm); or3-76 mm × 3.33 mm nails; or3-76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.9 mm crownEach end, toenailBlocking between rafters or truss not at the wall top plate, to rafter or truss2-8d common (65 mm × 3.3 mm)2-76 mm × 3.33 mm nails2-76 mm 14 gage staplesEach end, toenailFlat blocking to truss and web filler2-16d common (89 mm × 4.1 mm)3-76 mm × 3.3 mm nails3-76 mm 14 gage staplesEnd nail2. Ceiling joists to top plate16d common (89 mm × 4.1 mm) @ 150mm o.c.76 mm × 3.33 mm nails @ 150 mm o.c.76 mm × 14 gage staples @ 150 mm o.c.Face nail3. Ceiling joint not attached to parallel rafter, laps over partitions (no thrust) (see Section 2308.7.3.1, Table 2308.7.3.1)4-8d box (65 mm × 2.8 mm); or3-8d common (65 mm × 3.3 mm); or3-10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm); or3-76 mm × 3.33 mm nails; or3-76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.9 mm crownEach joint, toenail4. Ceiling joint attached to parallel rafter (heel joint) (see Section 2308.7.3.1, Table 2308.7.3.1)Per Table 2308.7.3.1Face nail5. Collar tie to rafter3-10d common (76 mm × 3.7 mm); or4-10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm); or4-76 mm × 3.3 mm nails; or4-76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.9 mm crownFace nail6. Rafter or roof truss to top plate (See Section 2308.7.5, Table 2308.7.5)3-10 common (76 mm × 3.7 mm); or3-16d box (89 mm × 3.3 mm); or4-10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm); or4-76 mm × 3.3 mm nails; or4-76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.9 mm crown2 toenails on one side and 1 toenail on opposite side of rafter or truss*7. Roof rafters to ridge valley or hip rafters; or roof rafter to 50 mm ridge beam2-16d common (89 mm × 4.1 mm); or3-16d box (89 mm × 3.3 mm); or3-10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm); or3-76 mm × 3.3 mm nails; or3-76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.9 mm crown; orEnd nail8. Stud to stud (not at braced wall panels)3-16d common (89 mm × 4.1 mm); or3-16d box (89 mm × 3.3 mm); or3-10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm); or3-76 mm × 3.3 mm nails; or3-76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.9 mm crown; orToenail9. Stud to stud and abutting studs at intersecting wall corners (at braced wall panels)3-16d common (89 mm × 3.7 mm); or3-16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or3-76 mm × 3.3 mm nails; or3-76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.9 mm crownToenail10. Built-up header (50 mm to 50 mm header)16d common (89 mm × 4.1 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16

===== Page 1733 =====
TABLE 2304.10.1

FASTENING SCHEDULE (Continued)

<table>DESCRIPTION OF BUILDING ELEMENTSNUMBER AND TYPE OF FASTENERSPACING AND LOCATION<td colspan="3">Wall12. Top plate to top plate16d common (89 mm × 4.1 mm); or10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm); or76 mm × 3.3 mm nails; or76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.9 mm crown450 mm o.c. face nail13. Top plate to top plate, at end joints8-16d common (89 mm × 4.1 mm); or12-16d box (89 mm × 3.3 mm); or12-10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm); or12-76 mm × 3.3 mm nails; or12-76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.9 mm crownEach side of end joint, face nail (minimum 600 mm lap splice length each side of end joint)14. Bottom plate to joint, rim joint, band joint or blocking (not at braced wall panels)16d common (89 mm × 4.1 mm)450 mm o.c. face nail15. Bottom plate to joint, rim joint, band joint or blocking at braced wall panels16d common (89 mm × 4.1 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm × 3.4 mm); or16d box (89 mm ×

===== Page 1734 =====
TABLE 2304.10.1

FASTENING SCHEDULE (Continued)

<table>DESCRIPTION OF BUILDING ELEMENTSNUMBER AND TYPE OF FASTENERSPACING AND LOCATION<td colspan="3">Floor21. Joist to sill, top plate, or girder4-8d box (65 mm x 2.82 mm); or3-8d common (65 mm × 3.3 mm); or3-10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm); or3-76 mm × 3.3 mm nails; or3-76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.9 mm crownToenail22. Rim joist, band joist, or blocking top plate, sill or other framing below8d box (65 mm × 2.82 mm)8d common (65 mm × 3.3 mm); or10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm); or76 mm × 3.3 mm nails; or76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.9 mm crown100 mm o.c., toenail23. 25 mm × 150 mm subfloor or less to each joist3-8d box (65 mm × 2.8 mm); or2-8d common (65 mm × 3.3 mm); or2-10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm) or2-43.8 mm 16 gage staples 25 mm crownFace nail24. 50 mm subfloor to joist or girder3-16d box (89 mm × 3.3 mm); or2-16d common (89 mm × 4.1 mm)Face nail25. 50 mm planks (plank &amp; beam - floor &amp; roof)3-16d box (89 mm × 3.3 mm); or3-16d common (89 mm × 4.1 mm)Each bearing, face nail26. Built-up girders and beams, 50 mm lumber layers20d common (102 mm × 4.8 mm)10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm); or76 mm × 3.3 mm nails; or76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.90 mm crown800 mm o.c., face nail at top and bottom staggered on opposite sides27. Ledger strip supporting joists or raftersAnd:2-20d common (102 mm × 4.8 mm); or3-10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm); or3-76 mm × 3.3 mm nails; or3-76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.9 mm crownEnds and at each splice, face nail28. Joist to band joist or rim joist3-16d common (89 mm × 4.1 mm); or4-16d box (89 mm × 3.3 mm); or4-10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm); or4-76 mm × 3.3 mm nails; or4-76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.9 mm crownEach joist or rafter, face nail29. Bridging or blocking to joist, rafter or truss3-16d common (89 mm × 4.1 mm); or4-10d box (76 mm × 3.2 mm); or4-76 mm × 3.3 mm nails; or4-76 mm 14 gage staples, 10.9 mm crownEnd nail<td colspan="3">Wood structural panels (WSP), subfloor, roof and interior wall sheathing to framing and particleboard wall sheathing to framingaEdges (mm)Intermediate supports (mm)30. 9.4 mm-12.5 mm6d common or deformed (51 mm × 2.82 mm) (subfloor and wall); or59 mm × 2.82 mm nail (subfloor and wall)1508d common or deformed (65 mm × 3.275 mm × 7 mm head) (roof) or RSRS-01 (59 × 2.8 mm) nail (roof)d150e43.8 mm 16 gage staple, 10.9 mm crown (subfloor and wall)15059 mm × 2.82 mm nail (roof)10043.8 mm 16 gage staple, 10.9 mm crown (subfloor and wall)75f43.8 mm 16 gage staple, 10.9 mm crown (roof)75f</table>

Continued

===== Page 1735 =====
TABLE 2304.10.1 FASTENING SCHEDULE (Continued)

<table><td rowspan="2">DESCRIPTION OF BUILDING ELEMENTS<td rowspan="2">NUMBER AND TYPE OF FASTENER<td colspan="2">SPACING AND LOCATIONEdges (mm)Intermediate supports (mm)31.14.8 mm - 18.75 mm8d common (65 mm × 3.3 mm); or deformed (51 mm × 2.8 mm) (subfloor and wall)1503008d common or deformed (65 mm × 3.2 mm x 7 mm head) (roof) or RSRS-01 (59.4 x 2.82 mm) nail (roof)d150°150°59 mm × 2.8 mm x 6.65 mm head nail; or 51 mm 16 gage staple, 10.9 mm crown10020032.21.9 mm - 31.25 mm10d common (76 × 3.7 mm); or deformed (65 × 3.3 mm x 7 mm head)150300<td colspan="4">Other exterior wall sheathing33. 12.5 mm fiberboard sheathingb37.5 mm x 3 mm, galvanized roofing nail (10.9 mm head diameter); or 31.3 mm 16 gage staple with 10.9 mm or 25 mm crown7515034. 19.5 mm fiberboard sheathingb43.8 mm x 3 mm galvanized roofing nail (10.9 mm diameter head); or 37.5 mm 16 gage staple with 10.9 mm or 25 mm crown75150<td colspan="4">Wood structural panels, combination subfloor underlayment to framing35. 18.8 mm and less8d common (65 mm × 3.3 mm); or deformed (51 mm × 2.82 mm) or deformed 51 mm x 3 mm15030036. 21.9 mm -25 mm8d common (65 mm × 3.3 mm); or deformed (65 mm × 3.3 mm); or deformed (65 mm × 3 mm)15030037. 28.1 mm - 31.3 mm10d common (76 mm × 3.7 mm); or deformed (65 mm × 3.3 mm); or deformed (65 mm × 3 mm)150300<td colspan="4">Panel siding to framing38. 12.5 mm or less6d corrosion-resistant siding (46.9 mm × 2.65 mm); or 6d corrosion-resistant casing (51 mm × 2.51 mm)15030039. 15.6 mm8d corrosion-resistant siding (34.4 mm × 3.2 mm); or 8d corrosion-resistant casing (65 mm × 2.82 mm)150300<td colspan="4">Wood structural panels (WSP), subfloor, roof and interior wall sheathing to framing and particleboard wall sheathing to framingaEdges (mm)Intermediate supports (mm)<td colspan="4">Interior paneling40. 6.3 mm4d casing (37.5 mm × 2 mm); or 4d finish (37.5 mm × 1.8 mm)15030041. 9.4 mm6d casing (51 mm × 2.47 mm); or 6d finish (51 mm × 2.3 mm) (Panel supports at 600 mm)150300</table>

a. Nails spaced at 150 mm at intermediate supports where spans are 1200 mm or more. For nailing of wood structural panel and particleboard diaphragms and shear walls, refer to Section 2305. Nails for wall sheathing are permitted to be common, box or casing.

b. Spacing shall be 150 mm on center on the edges and 300 mm on center at intermediate supports for nonstructural applications. Panel supports at 400 mm (500 mm if strength axis in the long direction of the panel, unless otherwise marked).

c. Where a rafter is fastened to an adjacent parallel ceiling joint in accordance with this schedule and the ceiling joint is fastened to the top plate in accordance with this schedule, the number of toenails in the rafter shall be permitted to be reduced by one nail.

d.RSRS-01 is a Roof Sheathing Ring Shank nail meeting the specifications in ASTM F1667.

e. Tabulated fastener requirements apply where the ultimate design wind speed is less than 62.5 m/s. For wood structural panel roof sheathing attached to gable-end roof framing and to intermediate supports within 1200 mm of roof edges and ridges, nails shall be spaced at 100 mm on center where the ultimate design wind speed is greater than 58 m/s in Exposure B or greater than 49 m/s in Exposure C. Spacing exceeding 150 mm on center at intermediate supports shall be permitted where the fastening is designed per the AWCNDS.

f. Fastening is only permitted where the ultimate design wind speed is less than or equal to 49 m/s.

g. Nails and staples are carbon steel meeting the specifications of ASTM F1667. Connections using nails and staples of other materials, such as stainless steel, shall be designed by acceptable engineering practice or approved under Section 104.11.

===== Page 1736 =====
TABLE 2304.11

MINIMUM DIMENSIONS OF HEAVY TIMBER STRUCTURAL MEMBERS

<table>MINIMUM NOMINAL SOLID SAWN SIZEMINIMUM GLUED LAMINATED NET SIZEMINIMUM STRUCTURAL COMPOSITE LUMBER NET SIZESupporting Heavy TimberSupporting Heavy Timber StructuralWidth, mmDepth, mmWidth, mmFloor loadsColumnsonly Or combined floor and roof loadsFramed sawn or Glued-Laminated Timber Arches that spring from the floor line; Framed Timber Trusses200200168.75Wood Beams and Girders150250125Columns (Roof and Ceiling Loads); Lower Half Of: Wood-Frame or Glued-Laminated arches that Spring from the Floor Line Or From Grade150200125Upper Half of: Wood-Frame or Glued-Laminated Arches That Spring from The Floor Line or From Grade150150125Roof Loads OnlyFramed Timber Trusses and other roof framing; Framed or Glued-Laminated arches that Spring from The Top of Walls or wall abutments100b15075b</table>

a. Spaced members shall be permitted to be composed of two or more pieces not less than 75 mm nominal in thickness where blocked solidly throughout their intervening spaces or where spaces are tightly closed by a continuous wood cover plate of not less than 50 mm nominal in thickness secured to the underside of the members. Splice plates shall be not less than 75 mm nominal in thickness.

b. Where protected by approved automatic sprinklers under the roof deck, framing members shall be not less than 75 mm nominal in width.

TABLE 2305.2(1)

 \( e_{n} \)  VALUES (mm) FOR USE IN CALCULATING DIAPHRAGM AND SHEAR WALL

DEFLECTION DUE TO FASTENER SLIP

(STRUCTURAL I) \( ^{a,c} \)

<table>LOAD PER FASTENER \( ^{b} \)  (N)FASTENER DESIGNATIONS14-Ga staple x 50 mm long2670.2753550.454440.705331.06221.327111.7</table>

a. Increase  \( e_{n} \)  values 20 percent for plywood grades other than Structural I.

b. Load per fastener = maximum shear per meter divided by the number of fasteners per meter at interior panel edges.

c. Decrease  \( e_{n} \)  values 50 percent for seasoned lumber (moisture content < 19 percent).

===== Page 1737 =====
TABLE 2305.2(2)

VALUES OF  \( G_{t} \)  FOR USE IN CALCULATING DEFLECTION OF WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL SHEAR WALLS AND DIAPHRAGMS

<table><td rowspan="3">PANEL TYPE<td rowspan="3">SPAN RATING<td colspan="9">VALUES OF  \( G_{t} \)  (N/mm panel depth or width)<td colspan="4">Other<td colspan="5">Structural I3-ply4-ply5-ply  \( {}^{a} \)OSB3-ply4-ply5-ply  \( {}^{a} \)OSB<td rowspan="5">Sheathing600/04,3805,6906,57013,5705,6907,4407,27013,570600/4004,7306,1307,09014,6206,1307,9707,79014,620800/4004,7306,1307,09014,6206,1307,9707,79014,6201000/5004,9906,4807,53015,5006,4808,4008,32015,5001200/6005,4307,0908,14016,8107,0909,1908,93016,810<td rowspan="5">Single Floor450 o.c.4,7306,1307,09014,6206,1307,9707,79014,620600 o.c.4,9006,3907,35015,2306,3908,3208,05015,230600 o.c.5,2506,8307,88016,2806,8308,8408,67016,280800 o.c.6,3008,2309,46019,2608,23010,68010,42019,2601200 o.c.8,84011,47013,31027,14011,47014,88014,62027,140</table>

<table><td rowspan="2"><td rowspan="2"><td colspan="4">Structural Sheathing<td colspan="4">Structural IThickness (mm)A-A, A-CMarineAll Other GradesA-A, A-CMarineAll Other Grades<td rowspan="12">Sanded Plywood6.34,2005,4304,2005,4305,4305,4305,4308.64,4705,7804,4705,7805,7805,7805,7809.44,5505,9504,5505,9505,9505,9505,95011.76,6508,6706,6508,6708,6708,6708,67012.56,7408,7606,7408,7608,7608,7608,76014.88,58011,1208,58011,12011,12011,12011,12015.68,67011,2908,67011,29011,29011,29011,290188,84011,4708,84011,47011,47011,47011,47018.88,93011,6408,93011,64011,64011,64011,64021.99,19011,9909,19011,99011,99011,99011,9902512,87016,72012,87016,72016,72016,72016,72028.113,13017,07013,13017,07017,07017,07017,070</table>

a. 5-ply applies to plywood with five or more layers. For 5-ply plywood with three layers, use values for 4-ply panels.

===== Page 1738 =====
TABLE 2306.1
STANDARDS FOR DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF WOOD ELEMENTS IN STRUCTURES USING ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN

<table>STANDARDS PROMULGATORSTANDARDTITLE<td colspan="3">American Wood CouncilANSI/AWC NDSNational Design Specification for Wood ConstructionSDPWSSpecial Design Provisions for Wind and Seismic<td colspan="3">American Society of Agricultural and Biological EngineersASABE EP 484.3Diaphragm Design of Metal-clad, Wood-Frame Rectangular BuildingsASABE EP 486.3Shallow Post and Pier Foundation DesignASABE EP 559.1Design Requirements and Bending Properties for Mechanically Laminated Wood Assemblies<td colspan="3">APA—The Engineered Wood AssociationANSI 117Standard Specifications for Structural Glued Laminated Timber of Softwood SpeciesANSI A190.1Structural Glued Laminated TimberPanel Design SpecificationPlywood Design Specification Supplement1—Design &amp; Fabrication of Plywood Curved PanelPlywood Design Specification Supplement2—Design &amp; Fabrication of Glued Plywood-lumber BeamsPlywood Design Specification Supplement3—Design &amp; Fabrication of Plywood Stressed-skin PanelsPlywood Design Specification Supplement4—Design &amp; Fabrication of Plywood Sandwich PanelsPlywood Design Specification Supplement5—Design &amp; Fabrication of All-plywood BeamsAPA T300Glulam Connection DetailsAPA S560Field Notching and Drilling of Glued Laminated Timber BeamsAPA S475Glued Laminated Beam Design TablesAPA X450Glulam in Residential ConstructionAPA X440Product and Application Guide: GlulamAPA R540Builders Tips: Proper Storage and Handling of Glulam Beams<td colspan="3">Truss Plate Institute, Inc.TPI 1National Design Standard for Metal Plate Connected Wood Truss Construction<td colspan="3">West Coast Lumber Inspection BureauAITC 104Typical Construction DetailsAITC 110Standard Appearance Grades for Structural Glued Laminated TimberAITC 113Standard for Dimensions of Structural Glued Laminated TimberAITC 119Standard Specifications for Structural Glued Laminated Timber of Hardwood SpeciesAITC 200Inspection Manual</table>

===== Page 1739 =====
TABLE 2306.1.4

ALLOWABLE LOADS FOR LUMBER DECKING

<table><td rowspan="2">PATTERN<td colspan="3">ALLOWABLE AREA LOADaMomentDeflectionSimple span8Fb′d2Wb=1/26WΔ=384ΔE′d351′4′12Two-span continuous8Fb′d2Wb=1/26WΔ=185ΔE′d31′4′12Combination simple- and two-span continuous8Fb′d2Wb=1/26WΔ=131ΔE′d31′4′12Cantilevered pieces intermixed20Fb′d2Wb=3/26WΔ=105ΔE′d31′4′12<td colspan="4">Controlled random layoutMechanically laminated decking20Fb′d2Wb=3/26WΔ=100ΔE′d31′4′1250 mm decking20Fb′d2Wb=3/26WΔ=100ΔE′d31′4′1275 mm and 100 mm decking8Fb′d2Wb=1/26WΔ=116ΔE′d31′4′12</table>

a.  \( w_{b}= \)  Allowable total uniform load limited by moment.

 \( w_{A}= \)  Allowable total uniform load limited by deflection.

d = Actual decking thickness

l = Span of decking

 \( F_{b}^{\prime}= \)  Allowable bending stress adjusted by applicable factors.

 \( E' \)  = Modulus of elasticity adjusted by applicable factors.

===== Page 1740 =====
TABLE 2306.2(1)

ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES (NEWTON/METER) FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL DIAPHRAGMS UTILIZING STAPLES WITH FRAMING OF DOUGLAS FIR-LARCH, OR SOUTHERN PINE \( ^{a} \)  FOR WIND OR SEISMIC LOADING \( ^{f} \)

<table><td rowspan="4">PANEL GRADE<td rowspan="4">STAPLE LENGTH AND GAGED<td rowspan="4">MINIMUM FASTENER IN FRAMING (mm)<td rowspan="4">MINIMUM NOMINAL PANEL THICKNESS (mm)<td rowspan="4">MINIMUM WIDTH OF FRAMING MEMBERS AT ADJOINING PANEL BOUNDARIES (mm)<td colspan="3">BLOCKED DIAPHRAGMS<td colspan="2">UNBLOCKED DIAPHRAGMS<td colspan="3">Fastener spacing (mm) at diaphragm boundaries (all cases) at continuous panel edges parallel to load (Cases 3, 4), and at all panel edges (Cases 5, 6)<td colspan="2">Fasteners spaced 6 max. at supported edgesb<td colspan="3">150 100 62.5c 50c<td rowspan="2">Case 1 (No unblocked edges or continuous joints parallel to load)<td rowspan="2">All other configurations (Cases 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6)150 100 62.5c 50c150 100 62.5c 50c150 100 62.5c 50c<td rowspan="3">Structural I grades<td rowspan="3">37.5 mm 16 gage<td rowspan="3">19.4502550 3430 511058402260167511.7752920 3865 576565652550190011.7502550 3430 5110584022601750<td rowspan="7">Sheathing, single floor and other grades covered in DOC PS 1 and PS 2<td rowspan="7">37.5 mm 16 gage<td rowspan="7">19.4502550 3430 511058402260190010.9752920 3865 576565652550153011.7502550 3430 511058402335175011.7502920 3865 576565652300160011.7502920 3865 576565652300153011.7502920 3865 576565652300153011.7502920 3865 5765656523001530</table>

a. For framing of other species: (1) Find specific gravity for species of lumber in ANSI/AWC NDS. (2) For staples find shear value from table above for Structural I panels (regardless of actual grade) and multiply value by 0.82 for species with specific gravity of 0.42 or greater, or 0.65 for all other species.

b. Space fasteners maximum 300 mm on center along intermediate framing members (150 mm on center where supports are spaced 1200 mm on center).

c. Framing at adjoining panel edges shall be 75 mm nominal or wider.

d. Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 10.9 mm and shall be installed with their crowns parallel to the long dimension of the framing members.

e. The minimum nominal width of framing members not located at boundaries or adjoining panel edges shall be 50 mm.

f. For shear loads of normal or permanent load duration as defined by the ANSI/AWC NDS, the values in the table above shall be multiplied by 0.63 or 0.56, respectively.

g. For Case 1 through 6 descriptions see Figure 2306.2(1).

===== Page 1741 =====
TABLE 2306.2(2)

ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES (NEWTON PER METER) FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL BLOCKED DIAPHRAGMS UTILIZING MULTIPLE ROWS OF STAPLES (HIGH-LOAD DIAPHRAGMS) WITH FRAMING OF DOUGLAS FIR-LARCH OR SOUTHERN PINE \( ^{a} \)  FOR WIND OR SEISMIC LOADING \( ^{b,g,h} \)

<table><td rowspan="4">PANEL GRADE*<td rowspan="4">STAPLE GAFE<td rowspan="4">MINIMUM FASTENER PENERATIO N IN FRAMING (mm)<td rowspan="4">MINIMUM WIDTH OF FRAMING MEMBER AT ADJONING PANEL S<td rowspan="4">MINIMUM WIDTH OF FRAMING MEMBER AT ADJONING PANEL S<td rowspan="4">LINES OF FASTENER S<td colspan="6">BLOCKED DIAPHRAGMS Cases 1 and 2d<td colspan="6">Fastener Spacing Per Line at Boundaries (mm)<td colspan="2">100<td colspan="2">62.5<td colspan="2">50<td colspan="2">Fastener Spacing Per Line at Other Panel Edges (mm)<td colspan="2">150<td colspan="2">100<td colspan="2">75<td rowspan="4">Structural I grades<td rowspan="4">14 gage staples<td rowspan="4">50<td rowspan="2">11.707528755875512551401154717501003125513131693189018902040<td rowspan="2">14.807528755875512771401156917501003127713131715210121522620<td rowspan="6">Sheathin g single floor and other grades covered in DOC PS 1 and PS 2<td rowspan="6">14 gage staples<td rowspan="6">50<td rowspan="2">11.707527880788010721262133515761003107211821467161216121744<td rowspan="2">14.807528755875512621401155417501003126213131649208720002167<td rowspan="2">14.8075287558755126213131649208720001003126213131649217420872255181003126213131649217420872255</table>

a. For framing of other species: (1) Find specific gravity for species of framing lumber in ANSI/AWC NDS. (2) For staples, find shear value from table above for Structural I panels (regardless of actual grade) and multiply value by 0.82 for species with specific gravity of 0.42 or greater, or 0.65 for all other species.

b. Fastening along intermediate framing members: Space fasteners a maximum of 300 mm on center, except 150 mm on center for spans greater than 800 mm.

c. Panels conforming to PS 1 or PS 2.

d. This table gives shear values for Cases 1 and 2 as shown in Table 2306.2(1). The values shown are applicable to Cases 3, 4, 5 and 6 as shown in Table 2306.2(1), providing fasteners at all continuous panel edges are spaced in accordance with the boundary fastener spacing.

e. The minimum nominal depth of framing members shall be 75 mm nominal. The minimum nominal width of framing members not located at boundaries or adjoining panel edges shall be 50 mm.

f. Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 10.9 mm and shall be installed with their crowns parallel to the long dimension of the framing members.

g. High-load diaphragms shall be subject to special inspection in accordance with Section 1705.5.1.

h. For shear loads of normal or permanent load duration as defined by the ANSI/AWC NDS, the values in the table above shall be multiplied by 0.63 or 0.56, respectively.

i. For fastener spacing diagrams see Figure 2306.2(2).

===== Page 1742 =====
TABLE 2306.3(1)

ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES (NEWTON PER METER) FOR WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL SHEAR WALLS UTILIZING STAPLES WITH FRAMING OF DOUGLAS FIR-LARCH OR SOUTHERN PINE \( ^{a} \)  FOR WIND OR SEISMIC LOADING \( ^{b,f,g,i} \)

<table><td rowspan="3">PANEL GRADE<td rowspan="3">MINIMUM NOMINAL PANEL THICKNESS (mm)<td rowspan="3">MINIMUM FASTENER PENETRATION IN FRAMING (mm)<td rowspan="3">PANELS APPLIED DIRECT TO FRAMING<td colspan="6">PANELS APPLIED OVER 12.5 mm OR 15.6 mm GYPSUM SHEATHING<td colspan="2">Faster spacing at panel edges (mm)<td rowspan="2">Staple length and gauge \( ^{h} \)<td colspan="3">Faster spacing at panel edges (mm)1501007550 \( ^{d} \)150100<td rowspan="3">Structural I sheathing9.4<td rowspan="3">12260 3430 4600 584010.93785 3480 3795 5035 642011.72700 4085 5475 6930<td rowspan="3">Sheathing, plywood siding \( ^{e} \)7.8 \( ^{e} \)  or 6.3 \( ^{e} \)<td rowspan="3">12115 3210 4305 54759.4375.5 mm 2040 3065 4085 525010.91260 3365 4525 5765<td rowspan="2">ANSI/APA PRP 210 siding11.7<td rowspan="2">12480 3720 4890 627514.8438.8 mm 2700 4085 5475 6930</table>

a. For framing of other species: (1) Find specific gravity for species of lumber in ANSI/AWC NDS. (2) For staples find shear value from table above for Structural I panels (regardless of actual grade) and multiply value by 0.82 for species with specific gravity of 0.42 or greater, or 0.65 for all other species.

b. Panel edges backed with 50 mm nominal or wider framing. Install panels either horizontally or vertically. Space fasteners maximum 150 mm on center along intermediate framing members for 9.4 mm and 10.9 mm panels installed on studs spaced 600 mm on center. For other conditions and panel thickness, space fasteners maximum 300 mm on center on intermediate supports.

c. 9.4 mm panel thickness or siding with a span rating of 400 mm on center is the minimum recommended where applied directly to framing as exterior siding. For grooved panel siding, the nominal panel thickness is the thickness of the panel measured at the point of fastening.

d. Framing at adjoining panel edges shall be 75 mm nominal or wider.

e. Values apply to all-veneer plywood. Thickness at point of fastening on panel edges governs shear values.

f. Where panels are applied on both faces of a wall and fastener spacing is less than 150 mm on center on either side, panel joints shall be offset to fall on different framing members, or framing shall be 75 mm nominal or thicker at adjoining panel edges.

g. In Seismic Design Category D, E or F, where shear design values exceed 5110 Newton per meter, all framing members receiving edge fastening from abutting panels shall be not less than a single 75 mm nominal member, or two 50 mm nominal members fastened together in accordance with Section 2306.1 to transfer the design shear value between framing members. Wood structural panel joint and sill plate nailing shall be staggered at all panel edges. See AWC SDPWS for sill plate size and anchorage requirements.

h. Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 10.90 mm and shall be installed with their crowns parallel to the long dimension of the framing members.

i. For shear loads of normal or permanent load duration as defined by the ANSI/AWC NDS, the values in the table above shall be multiplied by 0.63 or 0.56, respectively.

===== Page 1743 =====
TABLE 2306.3(2)

ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES (NEWTON PER LINEAR METER) FOR WIND OR SEISMIC LOADING ON SHEAR WALLS OF FIBERBOARD SHEATHING BOARD CONSTRUCTION UTILIZING STAPLES FOR TYPE V CONSTRUCTION ONLY \( ^{a,b,c,d,e} \)

<table><td rowspan="2">THICKNESS AND GRADE<td rowspan="2">FASTENER SIZE<td colspan="3">ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUE (Newton per linear meter)STAPLE SPACING AT PANEL EDGES (mm) \( ^{a} \)<td rowspan="2">12.5 mm or 19.5 mm StructuralNo. 11 gage galvanized staple, 10.9 mm crown 43.75 mm long1007550No. 11 gage galvanized staple, 25 mm crown 43.75 mm long219029203285</table>

a. Fiberboard sheathing shall not be used to brace concrete or masonry walls.

b. Panel edges shall be backed with 50 mm or wider framing of Douglas Fir-larch or Southern Pine. For framing of other species: (1) Find specific gravity for species of framing lumber in ANSI/AWC NDS. (2) For staples, multiply the shear value from the table above by 0.82 for species with specific gravity of 0.42 or greater, or 0.65 for all other species.

c. Values shown are for fiberboard sheathing on one side only with long panel dimension either parallel or perpendicular to studs.

d. Fastener shall be spaced 150 mm on center along intermediate framing members.

e. Values are not permitted in Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

===== Page 1744 =====
TABLE 2306.3(3)

ALLOWABLE SHEAR VALUES FOR WIND OR SEISMIC FORCES FOR SHEAR WALLS OF LATH AND PLASTER OR GYPSUM BOARD WOOD FRAMED WALL ASSEMBLIES UTILIZING STAPLES

<table>TYPE OF MATERIALTHICKNESS OF MATERIALWALL CONSTRUCTIONSTAPLE SPACINGb MAXIMUM (mm)SHEAR VALUEa, c (N/m)MINIMUM STAPLE SIZE f, g1. Expanded metal or woven wire lath and Portland cement plaster21.9 mmUnblocked1502625No. 16 gage galv. staple, 21.9 mm legs2. Gypsum lath, plain or perforated9.4 mm lath and 12.5 mm plasterUnblocked1251460No. 16 gage galv. staple, 28.1 mm long3. Gypsum sheating12.5 mm x 600 mm x 2400 mmUnblocked1001095No. 16 gage galv. staple, 43.8 mm long<td rowspan="10">4. Gypsum board, gypsum veneer base or water-resistant gypsum backing board<td rowspan="5">12.5 mm x 1200 mmBlockedd Unblocked1002550<td rowspan="5">No. 16 gage galv. staple, 37.5 mm longUnblocked1751460Unblocked1751095Unblocked1751600Unblocked1751460Unblocked1001825<td rowspan="3">No. 16 gage galv. staple, 37.5 mm longUnblocked1751825Unblocked1002190<td rowspan="5">15.6 mmUnblockedd1751675<td rowspan="5">No. 16 gage galv. staple, 40.6 mm long No. 16 gage galv. staple, 56.3 mm longUnblocked1002115Unblocked1752115Unblocked1002550Blockede Two-playBase ply: 225 Face ply: 1753650</table>

a. These shear walls shall not be used to resist loads imposed by masonry or concrete walls (see AWC SDPWS). Values shown are for short-term loading due to wind or seismic loading. Walls resisting seismic loads shall be subject to the limitations in Section 12.2.1 of SBC 301. Values shown shall be reduced 25 percent for normal loading.

b. Applies to fastening at studs, top and bottom plates and blocking.

c. Except as noted, shear values are based on a maximum framing spacing of 400 mm on center.

d. Maximum framing spacing of 600 mm on center.

e. All edges are blocked, and edge fastening is provided at all supports and all panel edges.

f. Staples shall have a minimum crown width of 10.9 mm, measured outside the legs, and shall be installed with their crowns parallel to the long dimension of the framing members.

g. Staples for the attachment of gypsum lath and woven-wire lath shall have a minimum crown width of 18.8 mm, measured outside the legs.

===== Page 1745 =====
FIGURE 2303.1.1
TYPICAL LABELS (GRADE MARKS)
AMERICAN LUMBER STANDARDS COMMITTEE, U.S.D.C.

SECTION (EXAMPLE OF SINGLE ROW OF PITMR WITH PITMDB ON WEB MEMBERS)

FIGURE 2303.4.1.2(1)

PITMR AND PITMDB FOR TRUSS WEB MEMBERS REQUIRING TWO ROWS OF PITMR

===== Page 1746 =====
ELEVATION VIEW OF L, T OR SCAB REINFORCEMENT

TYPES OF WEB MEMBER BUCKLING REINFORCEMENT

a.) Trust top chord and bottom chord members shall be restrained and broad.

b.) Bracing to resist forces applied perpendicular to the truss, such as wind bracing at gable ends, shall be specified by the building designer.

c.) Use the table below unless project specific web member reinforcement is provided on the truss design drawing or supplemental truss buckling reinforcement details are provided by the truss designer.

<table>Number of bows of PITMR specified on web memberSize of truss webType and Size of Web for I or U reinforcement \( ^{1} \)  For T, L or SCAB \( ^{2} \)Grade of WEB ReinforcementMinimum length of WEB reinforcementConnection of WEB reinforcement to web<td rowspan="3">One50 x 100 mm50 x 100 mm<td rowspan="3">Same species and grade or better than web member<td rowspan="3">90 % of web or extend to within 150 mm of end of web member, whichever is greater<td rowspan="3">(3.2 mm x 76 mm) nails at 150 mm on-center50 x 150 mm50 x 150 mm50 x 200 mm50 x 200 mm</table>

 \( ^{1} \)  maximum allowable web length is 4.2 m

 \( ^{2} \)  attach scab reinforcement to web with two rows of minimum 3.2 mm x 76 mm at 150 mm on-center

FIGURE 2303.4.1.2(2)

ALTERNATIVE INSTALLATION USING BUCKLING REINFORCEMENT FOR TRUSS WEB MEMBERS IN LIEU OF ONE ROW OF PITMR

A) Use minimum 50 x 100 mm stress graded lumber for PITMR and PITMDB unless otherwise specified

b.) Truss lap chord and bottom chord members shall be restrained and broad.

c.) Bracing to resist forces applied perpendicular to the truss, such as wind bracing at gable ends, shall be specified by the building designer.

ELEVATION VIEW OF TRUSS WITH DOUBLE ROW, PITMR

SECTION (EXAMPLE OF DOUBLE ROW OF PITMR WITH PITMDB ON WEB MEMBERS)

FIGURE 2303.4.1.2(3)

PITMR AND PITMDB FOR TRUSS WEB MEMBERS REQUIRING TWO ROWS OF PITMR

===== Page 1747 =====
TYPES OF WEB MEMBER BUCKING REINFORCEMENT

c.) Use the table below unless project specific web member reinforcement is provided on the truss design drawing or supplemental truss buckling reinforcement details are provided by the truss designer.

<table>Number of bows of PITMR specified on web memberSize of truss webType and Size of Web for I or U reinforcement \( ^{1} \)Grade of WEB ReinforcementMinimum length of WEB reinforcementMinimum Connection of WEB reinforcement to WEB<td rowspan="3">TWO50 x 100 mm(2)- 50 x 100 mm<td rowspan="3">Same species and grade or better than web member<td rowspan="3">90 % of web or extend to within 150 mm of end of web member, whichever is greater<td rowspan="3">(3.2 mm x 76 mm) nails at 150 mm on-center50 x 150 mm(2)- 50 x 150 mm50 x 200 mm(2)- 50 x 200 mm</table>

 \( ^{1} \)  maximum allowable web length is 4.2 m

FIGURE 2303.4.1.2(4)

ALTERNATIVE INSTALLATION USING BUCKING REINFORCEMENT FOR TRUSS WEB MEMBERS IN LIEU OF TWO ROWS OF PITMR

===== Page 1748 =====
a) Use minimum 50 x 100 mm stress graded lumber for PITMR and PITMDB unless otherwise specified.
b) Web PITMDB and PITMDB not shown for clarity.
c) Truss top chord and bottom chord members shall be restrained and braced.
d) Bracing to resist forces applied perpendicular to the truss, such as wind bracing at gable ends, shall be secured by the building designer.
SECTION ATA

FIGURE 2303.4.1.2(5)

PITMR AND PITMDB FOR FLAT PORTION OF TOP CHORD IN A PIGGYBACK ASSEMBLY

===== Page 1749 =====
FIGURE 2304.9.2.1
SIMPLE SPAN PATTERN

FIGURE 2304.9.2.2
TWO-SPAN CONTINUOUS PATTERN

FIGURE 2304.9.2.3

COMBINATION SIMPLE AND TWO-SPAN CONTINUOUS PATTERN

===== Page 1750 =====
FIGURE 2304.9.2.4
CANTILEVERED PIECES INTERMIXED PATTERN

FIGURE 2304.9.4.1
50 mm TONGUE-AND-GROOVE DECKING

FIGURE 2304.9.4.3
CONTROLLED RANDOM PATTERN 50 MM TONGUE-AND-GROOVE DECKING

===== Page 1751 =====
FIGURE 2304.9.5.1
75 AND 100 mm TONGUE-AND-GROOVE DECKING

===== Page 1752 =====
FIGURE 2304.10.2

STANDARD NAILS AND STAPLES

INDEPENDENT NAIL PACKING CO., BRIDGEWATER, MA

===== Page 1753 =====
FIGURE 2304.10.3
SHEATHING FASTENERS

FIGURE 2304.12.1.1
WOOD FRAMING CLEARANCES

===== Page 1754 =====
FIGURE 2304.12.1.5(1)
SIDING CLEARANCES

FIGURE 2304.12.1.5(2)
SIDING CLEARANCE AT CONCRETE PATIO

===== Page 1755 =====
FIGURE 2304.12.2.1
GIRDER END CLEARANCE

FIGURE 2304.12.2.2
POST AND COLUMN PROTECTION

FIGURE 2306.2(1)
CASES 1 THROUGH 6 FOR USE WITH TABLE 2306.2(1)

===== Page 1756 =====
COMMENTARY FIGURE 2306.2(1)
HOW WOOD SPLITS AND
HOW STAGGERING MINIMIZES SPLITTING

100 mm NOMINAL—THREE LINES

NOTE: SPACE PANEL END AND EDGE JOINT 3 mm REDUCE SPACING BETWEEN LINES OF NAILS AS NECESSARY TO MAINTAIN MINIMUM 10 mm FASTENER EDGE MARGINS, MINIMUM SPACING BETWEEN LINES IS 10 mm

FIGURE 2306.2(2)
FASTENER SPACING DIAGRAMS FOR USE WITH TABLE 2306.2(2)

===== Page 1757 =====
COMMENTARY FIGURE 2306.2(2)
STAGGERED NAILING

===== Page 1758 =====
This page left intentionally blank

