===== Page 0070 =====
# CHAPTER 2—DEFINITIONS

## General Comments

Nearly all terms defined in the code are listed and defined in Chapter 2. While many terms are used primarily in one chapter or another, the vast majority of terms are used outside of their chapter of primary significance. An example would be the term "fire barrier." The requirements for the construction of a fire barrier are found in Section 707, but fire barriers are required to provide fire-resistive separations by such diverse Sections as 508.4.4 for separated mixed occupancies, and 1023 for the enclosure of interior exit stairways. There are some terms that have definitions that are specifically limited to the use of the term in a specific chapter or section of the code. This chapter specifically states where this is the case. There are other terms that have more than one definition. For example, "basement" is defined for general application, but is also defined differently as it applies to flood plain hazard regulation in Section 1612.

This chapter only provides a reference to definitions that, in Chapter 19, are amended versions of definitions in a referenced standard.

## Purpose

Codes, by their very nature, are technical documents. Every word, term and punctuation mark can add to or change the meaning of a technical requirement. Where a technical provision requires a specific performance, the intent of a definition may be of greater importance than the exact wording. With its broad scope of applicability, the code includes terms inherent in a variety of construction disciplines. These terms often have multiple meanings, depending on the context or discipline being used at the time. For these reasons, it is necessary to maintain a consensus on the specific meaning of terms contained in the code. Chapter 2 performs this function by stating clearly what specific terms mean for the purpose of the code.

## SECTION 201 GENERAL

201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.

The use of words and terms in the code is governed by the provisions of this section. This includes code defined terms as well as those terms that are not defined in the code.

201.2 Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.

While the definitions contained in Chapter 2 are to be taken literally, gender and tense are interchangeable.

201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in other referenced Saudi codes, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.

If a word or term is defined in another code but not in this code, the definition applies in this code.

201.4 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.

The intent of this statement is that a dictionary definition may suffice, provided it is in context. Often, construction terms used throughout the code are not specifically defined in the code or even in a dictionary. In such a case, the definitions contained in the referenced standards (see Chapter 35) and published textbooks on the subject in question are good resources.

## SECTION 202 DEFINITIONS

24-HOUR BASIS. The actual time that a person is an occupant within a facility for the purpose of receiving care. It shall not include a facility that is open for 24 hours and is capable of providing care to someone visiting the facility during any segment of the 24 hours.

Care offered on a 24-hour basis is used to differentiate groups and levels of protection between institutional facilities that typically house care recipients for more than a day, such as hospitals, detoxification facilities, foster care and nursing homes, from other care facilities that keep care recipients for only part of a day, such as day cares, clinics, day surgery centers and outpatient facilities. To better understand how these concepts work together, see the definitions for "Ambulatory care facility," "Custodial care," "Personal care," "Medical care" and "Incapable of self-preservation." Facilities that have care recipients

===== Page 0071 =====
/residents/customers who typically stay for 24 hours or more are considered to be providing care on a 24-hour care basis. However, a facility that operates 24 hours a day, such as a day care or an urgent care facility, would not be considered as providing care on a 24-hour basis provided that the clients did not stay 24 hours, but instead were in and out of the facility similar to one that closed for the night.

AAC MASONRY. Masonry made of autoclaved aerated concrete (AAC) units, manufactured without internal reinforcement and bonded together using thin- or thick-bed mortar.

This definition establishes that the requirements of Chapter 21 apply to masonry units manufactured from autoclaved aerated concrete (AAC). AAC masonry units are low-density cementitious products. Besides being a relatively lightweight product, AAC is also considered to provide good thermal and acoustic insulation. AAC masonry units are bonded together using a thin-bed polymer mortar specifically manufactured for use with AAC masonry.

ACCESSIBLE. A site, building, facility or portion thereof that complies with Chapter 11.

This definition identifies the fundamental concept of Chapter 11. Accessibility is deemed to be accomplished where a building, site or facility complies with the applicable provisions of Chapter 11 and ICC A117.1. The code is not intended to accommodate fully every type and range of disability, as it would not be feasible to do so. The extent to which the code requires accessible features in the various occupancies covered by Chapter 11 (scoping) and the characteristics those features are required to meet through reference to ICC A117.1 (technical requirements) establish that which the code considers accessible.

There are elements that are related to accessibility that also have requirements generally applicable for public safety. Examples are audible and visible alarms in Chapter 9; ramps, doors, protruding objects and accessible means of egress in Chapter 10; and elevator requirements in Chapter 30. These items have been “mainstreamed” into the code.

ACCESSIBLE MEANS OF EGRESS. A continuous and unobstructed way of egress travel from any accessible point in a building or facility to a public way.

Accessible means of egress requirements are needed to provide those persons with physical disabilities or mobility impairments a means of egress to exit the building on their own or reach a place where assisted rescue will be available. Because of physical limitations, some
occupants may need assistance to exit a building. See Section 1009 for requirements establishing areas where people can safely wait for assisted rescue. Chapter 4 of SBC 801 also includes requirements in the fire safety and evacuation plans specific to occupants who may need assistance in evacuation during emergencies. In addition, Chapter 9 of the code includes requirements for emergency evacuation notification for persons with hearing disabilities.

The accessible means of egress requirements may not be the same route as that required for ingress into the building (see Sections 1104 and 1105). For example, a two-story building requires one accessible route to connect all accessible spaces within the building. The accessible route to the second level is typically by an elevator. During a fire emergency, persons with mobility impairments on the second level would move to the exit stairways for assisted rescue, not back to the way they entered the level, via the elevator.

ACCESSIBLE ROUTE. A continuous, unobstructed path that complies with Chapter 11.

There are typically more physical barriers in the built environment to people with a mobility impairment than in any other category of disability. An accessible route enables a person with a mobility impairment to approach and utilize a facility's accessible fixtures and features. While there are a variety of mobility devices, the design and construction of an accessible route is based predominantly on provisions necessary for accessibility to a person using a wheelchair. Accessible routes are required for both ingress and egress (see Section 1009 and 1104).

An accessible route must also be safe and usable by people with other disabilities and those without disabilities. Requirements set forth in consideration of those needs include restrictions on objects that protrude into a circulation path in consideration of a person with a visual impairment as well as the possibility of smoke limiting visibility during an emergency.

ACCESSIBLE UNIT. A dwelling unit or sleeping unit that complies with this code and the provisions for Accessible units in ICC A117.1.

There are three levels of accessibility described in the code pertaining to dwelling units: Accessible units (always spelled with a capital "A"), Type A units and Type B units. Accessible units are required to be constructed as fully accessible, meaning all required features are present at first occupancy. Unlike Type A and Type B units, Accessible units have no features left as adaptable. Accessible units provide a "higher" level of accessibility than

===== Page 0072 =====
Type A and Type B units and are mandated in all Group I occupancies (as a percentage), in Group R-1 occupancies (per Table 1108.6.1.1), in most Group R-2 congregate living (per Table 1108.6.1.1) and in Group R-4 (at least one unit for Group 1 and two units for Group 2). The technical criteria for Accessible dwelling units are identified in Section 1102 of the 2017 ICC A117.1, whereas in the 1998 ICC A117.1 they were spread throughout Chapters 1 through 9. Also see the commentary to the definitions of “Dwelling unit,” “Sleeping unit,” “Type A unit” and “Type B units,” and Section 1108.2.

ACCREDITATION BODY. An approved, third-party organization that is independent of the grading and inspection agencies, and the lumber mills, and that initially accredits and subsequently monitors, on a continuing basis, the competency and performance of a grading or inspection agency related to carrying out specific tasks.

The process of determining the grade of lumber not only includes the actual method of applying the grade stamp to the product, but also the certification of the grading agency, its methods of quality control, its rules and the work of its agents. For example, an independent third-party quality control program meeting the accreditation requirements of the American Lumber Standard Committee, Inc. (ALSC), or an equivalent process, is required for all softwood lumber that is to be graded for use in construction.

ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area, number of stories or height of a building or structure.

This term is used to describe the condition where the floor area, the number of stories or height of an existing building or structure is increased. This term is only applicable to existing buildings, never new ones. This would include additional floor area that is added within an existing building, such as adding a new mezzanine. [See Section 101.4.7 for a reference to the Saudi Existing Building Code (SBC 901).]

ADHERED MASONRY VENEER. Veneer secured and supported through the adhesion of an approved bonding material applied to an approved backing.

This type of masonry veneer relies on the backing surface for both vertical and lateral load resistance. The components of adhered masonry veneer construction generally include the masonry veneer, the adhering material and the backing to which the veneer is attached. It should be noted that the term “approved” means components are subject to approval by the building official, in accordance with Section 104.

ADOBE CONSTRUCTION. Construction in which the exterior load-bearing and non-load-bearing walls and partitions are of unfired clay masonry units, and floors, roofs and interior framing are wholly or partly of wood or other approved materials.

ADOBE, STABILIZED. Unfired clay masonry units to which admixtures, such as emulsified asphalt, are added during the manufacturing process to limit the units' water absorption so as to increase their durability.

ADOBE, UNSTABILIZED. Unfired clay masonry units that do not meet the definition of “Adobe, stabilized.”

This form of construction has relatively low strength, a lack of formalized design procedures and labor-intensive manufacture of units and construction of the building; thus, it has not been used as much in recent years.

Two types of adobe masonry, stabilized and unstabilized, are briefly described. Prescriptive design requirements for adobe masonry are contained in Section 2109.2.

In stabilized adobe, admixtures are used to produce more durable units (see Section 2109.2.2).

Unstabilized adobe does not contain stabilizers in the soil and is, therefore, not as durable as stabilized adobe (see Section 2109.2.1).

AEROSOL CONTAINER. A metal can or plastic container up to a maximum size of 1000 ml, or a glass bottle up to a maximum size of 118 ml, designed and intended to dispense an aerosol.

All design criteria for the aerosol container, including the maximum size and minimum strength, are set by the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOTn 49 CFR) and addressed in Section 5104 of SBC 801.

AEROSOL PRODUCT. A combination of a container, a propellant and a material that is dispensed. Aerosol products shall be classified by means of the calculation of their chemical heats of combustion and shall be designated Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3.

LEVEL 1 AEROSOL PRODUCTS. Those with a total chemical heat of combustion that is less than or equal to 20 kJ/g.

LEVEL 2 AEROSOL PRODUCTS. Those with a total chemical heat of combustion that is greater than 20 kJ/g, but less than or equal to 30 kJ/g.

LEVEL 3 AEROSOL PRODUCTS. Those with a total chemical heat of combustion that is greater than 30 kJ/g.

The code is intended to regulate those aerosol products that contain a flammable propellant

===== Page 0073 =====
such as butane, isobutane or propane. An aerosol product such as whipped cream is a water-based material with a nonflammable propellant (nitrous oxide) and would, therefore, not be regulated as a hazardous material. The contents of an aerosol container may be dispensed in the form of a mist spray, foam, gel or aerated powder.

Because of the wide range of flammability of aerosol products, a classification system was established to determine the required level of fire protection. Categories are defined according to the aerosol's chemical heat of combustion expressed in kilo joules gram (KJ/g). Aerosol category classifications of Levels 1, 2 and 3 are used to avoid confusion with flammable liquid classifications.

Examples of Level 1 aerosol products are shaving gel, whipped cream and air fresheners. Level 1 aerosols are not regulated as a hazardous material and are essentially exempt from the requirements of Sections 307 and 414. Examples of Level 2 aerosols include some hair sprays and insect repellents. Level 3 aerosols include carburetor cleaner and other petroleum-based aerosols.

While aerosols are defined as hazardous materials, note that they are not listed in Table 307.1(1) or 307.1(2) as having a maximum allowable quantity per control area. As stated in Item 12 in Section 307.1.1, a building or structure used for aerosol product storage is classified as Group S-1, provided the requirements of SBC 801 are satisfied. Therefore, the Group H classification is not utilized since the design must satisfy SBC 801 in order to be in compliance.
AGGREGATE. In roofing, crushed stone, crushed slag or water-worn gravel used for surfacing for roof coverings.

Aggregate is gravel, stone or slag used as a roof surfacing to provide a walking surface and protection to the roof covering. An aggregate typically is not used as a ballast material based on its small size.

AGRICULTURAL BUILDING. A structure designed and constructed to house farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock or other horticultural products. This structure shall not be a place of human habitation or a place of employment where agricultural products are processed, treated or packaged, nor shall it be a place used by the public.

This definition is needed for the proper application of the utility and miscellaneous occupancy group and Appendix C provisions. The use of the building is restricted such that buildings that include habitable or public spaces are not agricultural buildings by definition.

AIR-IMPERMEABLE INSULATION. An insulation having an air permeance equal to or less than 0.02 l/s × m² at 75 pa pressure differential tested in accordance with ASTM E283 or ASTM E2178.

In buildings with conditioned spaces, an air-impermeable layer may be required to prevent the movement of air through the building's thermal envelope. In some cases, insulation will serve that purpose, provided that it is insulation as defined here. Air leakage, also known as air infiltration, is also specifically addressed for both commercial and residential buildings under the Saudi Energy Conservation Code (SBC 601 and SBC 602).

AIR-INFILATED STRUCTURE. A structure that uses air pressurized membrane beams, arches or other elements to enclose space. Occupants of such a structure do not occupy the pressurized area used to support the structure.

This type of membrane structure is characterized by multiple layers arranged such that air-pressurized membrane beams, arches or similar elements are formed. These elements are pressurized with air and form the membrane structure. Note that the occupants of the structure are not subjected to the pressurized areas, because the pressurization is in the structural elements, not within the space used by the occupants.

AIR-SUPPORTED STRUCTURE. A structure wherein the shape of the structure is attained by air pressure and occupants of the structure are within the elevated pressure area. Air-supported structures are of two basic types:

DOUBLE SKIN. Similar to a single skin, but with an attached liner that is separated from the outer skin and provides an airspace which serves for insulation, acoustic, aesthetic or similar purposes.

SINGLE SKIN. Where there is only the single outer skin and the air pressure is directly against that skin.

An air-supported structure identifies those membrane structures that are completely pressurized for the purposes of supporting the membrane covering. Most “domed” sports arenas use air pressure within the structure to support the membrane covering. The membrane covering can consist of one layer or multiple layers; thus, air-supported structures are classified as either “single skin” or “double skin.”

A double-skin, air-supported structure contains multiple layers of membrane sheathing. The membranes are usually separated by enough distance to allow for pressurized air or other

===== Page 0074 =====
materials to be inserted between the plies. The pressurized air or other materials usually serve to increase the insulating and acoustical properties.

A single-skin, air-supported structure consists of just one membrane covering that is directly supported by the interior pressurized air. No other membranes are provided for insulating or acoustical purposes. where the membrane covering consists of several laminated plies, such an arrangement is still considered a single-skin, air-supported structure.

AISLE. An unenclosed exit access component that defines and provides a path of egress travel.

Aisles and aisle access-ways are both utilized as part of the means of egress in facilities where tables, seats, displays or other furniture may limit the path of travel. The aisle access-ways lead to the main aisles that lead to the exits from the space and building [see Commentary Figure 202(1)]. While both may result in a confined path of travel, an aisle is an unenclosed component, while a corridor would be an enclosed component of the means of egress (see Sections 1018 and 1030 for requirements for aisles).

AISLE ACCESS-WAY. That portion of an exit access that leads to an aisle.

As illustrated in Commentary Figure 202(1), an aisle access-way is intended for one-way travel or limited two-way travel. The space between tables, seats, displays or other furniture (i.e., aisle access-way) utilized for means of egress will lead to a main aisle (see Sections 1018 and 1030 for requirements for aisle access-ways).

ALARM NOTIFICATION APPLIANCE. A fire alarm system component such as a bell, horn, speaker, light or text display that provides audible, tactile or visible outputs, or any combination thereof.

The code requires that fire alarm systems be equipped with approved alarm notification appliances so that in an emergency, the fire alarm system will notify the occupants of the need for evacuation or implementation of the fire emergency plan. Alarm notification devices required by the code are of two general types: visible and audible. Except for emergency voice/alarm communication systems, once the fire alarm system has been activated, all visible and audible communication alarms are required to activate. Emergency voice/alarm communication systems are special signaling systems that are activated selectively in response to specific emergency conditions but have the capability to be activated throughout the building if necessary.

ALARM SIGNAL. A signal indicating an emergency requiring immediate action, such as a signal indicative of fire.

This is a general term for all types of supervisory and trouble signals. An example would be a supervisory (tamper) switch on a sprinkler control valve. It could also be the response to a specific device that is not part of the alarm notification system but that causes a specific function such as a smoke detector for elevator recall. The activation of the device does not necessarily indicate that there is a fire; however, the level of protection may have been compromised (see the definition of "Fire alarm signal").

ALARM VERIFICATION FEATURE. A feature of automatic fire detection and alarm systems to reduce unwanted alarms wherein smoke detectors report alarm conditions for a minimum period of time, or confirm alarm conditions within a given time period, after being automatically reset, in order to be accepted as a valid alarm-initiation signal.

False fire (evacuation) alarms are a nuisance. For this reason, the code specifies that alarms activated by smoke detectors are not to be sounded until the alarm signal is verified by cross-zoned detectors in a single protected area or by system features that will retard the alarm until the signal is determined to be valid. Valid alarm initiation signals can be determined by detectors that report alarm conditions for a minimum period of time or, after being reset, continue to report an alarm condition. The alarm verification feature may not retard signal activation for a period of more than 60 seconds and must not apply to alarm-initiating devices other than smoke detectors (which may be connected to the same circuit). Alarm verification is not the same as presignal features that delay an alarm signal for more than 1 minute and that are allowed only where specifically permitted by the building official.

ALLOWABLE STRESS DESIGN. A method of proportioning structural members, such that elastically computed stresses produced in the members by nominal loads do not exceed specified allowable stresses (also called “working stress design”).

This definition describes the allowable stress design (ASD) method, which is one of the design approaches recognized under the code in Section 1604.1. In this approach, the computed stresses determined from the unfactored, or nominal, loads (see the definition for “Nominal loads”) cannot exceed allowable stresses, which provide a factor of safety. The material chapters of the code specify either the allowable stresses for a given material or, in some cases, provide allowable capacities of specific assemblies, such as the

===== Page 0075 =====
wood structural panel shear wall capacities specified in Chapter 23.

ALTERATION. Any construction or renovation to an existing structure other than repair or addition.

The code utilizes this term to reflect construction operations intended for an existing building, but not within the scope of an addition or repair (see the definitions of "Addition" and "Repair"). (See Section 101.4.7 for a reference to SBC 901.)

ALTERNATING TREAD DEVICE. A device that has a series of steps between 50 and 70 degrees from horizontal, usually attached to a center support rail in an alternating manner so that the user does not have both feet on the same level at the same time.

An alternating tread device is commonly used in areas that would otherwise be provided with a ladder where there is not adequate space for a full stairway. Where these devices are permitted is specifically listed in the code (for example, Section 1006.2.2.1). The device is used extensively in industrial facilities for worker access to platforms or equipment. Requirements are found with stairways in Section 1011.14.

AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to persons who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided or staff has accepted responsibility for care recipients already incapable.

The code provides different requirements for outpatient clinics, ambulatory care facilities and hospitals. Ambulatory care facilities, while still classified as a Group B occupancy, have additional standards above those of an outpatient clinic because its care recipients are temporarily unable to respond to emergencies due to treatment processes or staff has taken charge of a person who cannot self-evacuate (see commentary, Section 422 and the definition of "Incapable of self-preservation"). Ambulatory care facilities include day surgery centers and similar facilities where care recipients may receive fairly intensive treatment, but do not stay at the facility more than a few hours. Where care recipients are receiving care on a 24-hour basis, such facilities would be defined as hospitals (see definition, "24-hour basis").

ANCHOR BUILDING. An exterior perimeter building of a group other than H having direct access to a covered or open mall building but having required means of egress independent of the mall.
An anchor building is a facility that, by its nature, draws a considerable number of people. The tenants in the adjoining covered or open mall building then seek to capitalize on the traffic generated by the anchor building. Traditionally, anchor buildings have tended to be large department stores. However, with consolidation in the retail world, the character of anchor buildings has expanded to include other sorts of establishments, including movie theaters and restaurants. The scale or size of the building is not a primary factor in determining whether it is an anchor building; rather, that its function generates sufficient traffic to benefit mall tenants is the key [see Commentary Figure 202(2)].

Generally, the anchor building will have its own identity and there is a high probability that it will have separate management and its own hours of operation. This will necessitate a means of egress that does not rely on the mall being available for its patrons to enter or leave. Similarly, the means of egress from the covered or open mall building cannot rely on the anchor building being open and available for patrons to exit through. Therefore, egress facilities for the anchor building must be independent of those for the covered or open mall building. An anchor building is a separate building from the covered or open mall building and must comply with the provisions of the code for its own identity, except as modified by Section 402 (see Sections 402.4 and 402.4.2.2).

ANCHORED MASONRY VENEER. Veneer secured with approved mechanical fasteners to an approved backing.

This type of masonry veneer is generally supported from below and anchored to the sheathing, studs or other structural portion of the wall. Veneers provide little, if any, strength to the wall and are, therefore, considered to be nonstructural. Anchored masonry veneer is unique in that it is usually supported from below by a footing, lintels or shelf angles. Anchored masonry veneer must not, however, support loads other than its own dead loads, wind loads and seismic loads resulting from the dead load of the wall.

ANNULAR SPACE. The opening around the penetrating item.

The annular space is the space created between the outer surface of a penetrating item and the construction penetrated. Where left unfilled, the space can provide a means of free passage for smoke, fire and products of combustion [see Commentary Figure 202(3) for an example of an annular space]. Sections 714.4.1, 714.4.2, 714.5.1.1 and 714.5.1.2 contain the requirements for protection of

===== Page 0076 =====
annular spaces. Tested and listed through-penetration firestop systems (see Sections 714.4.1.2 and 714.5.1.2), which are commonly used to seal these annular spaces, generally specify maximum and minimum allowable annular spaces to ensure that the intended fire-resistance rating is achieved. The minimum and maximum annular spaces for a penetrating item are frequently not equal, as penetrating items are often located eccentrically in the hole (i.e., not perfectly centered).

ANNUNCIATOR. A unit containing one or more indicator lamps, alphanumeric displays or other equivalent means in which each indication provides status information about a circuit, condition or location.

This refers to the panel that displays the status of the monitored fire protection systems and devices. It is not the fire alarm control unit, though the control panel may include an annunciator.

APPROVED. Acceptable to the building official.

As related to the process of acceptance of building installations, including materials, equipment and construction systems, this definition identifies where the ultimate authority rests. Whenever this term is used, it intends that only the enforcing authority can accept a specific installation or component as complying with the code. For the code and SBC 1101/1102, the "building official" is identified as the person responsible for administering its provisions. For SBC 801, the "fire code official" is identified as the person responsible for administering SBC 801 provisions. For SBC 601/SBC 602, SBC 1201, SBC 1001, SBC 501, SBC 701, SBC 1401 and, the "building official" is identified as the person responsible.

APPROVED AGENCY. An established and recognized agency that is regularly engaged in conducting tests, furnishing inspection services or furnishing product certification where such agency has been approved by the building official.

Third-party testing or inspections may be needed for elements within the built environment. The basis for the building official's approval of any agency for a particular activity may include, but is not limited to, the capacity and capability of the agency to perform the work in accordance with Section 1705 and other applicable sections. This is typically done through a review of the résumés and references of the agency and its personnel. This definition also recognizes that agencies are generally approved through a nationally recognized accreditation body for testing, inspections or product certification. For this code, the building official is identified as the person responsible for approval.
APPROVED FABRICATOR. An established and qualified person, firm or corporation approved by the building official pursuant to Chapter 17 of this code.

An approved fabricator is one who has received approval to perform work without a code-required special inspection. The approval is based on review of the fabricator's written procedural and quality-control manuals, and periodic auditing of fabrication practices by an approved special inspection agency.

APPROVED SOURCE. An independent person, firm or corporation, approved by the building official, who is competent and experienced in the application of engineering principles to materials, methods or systems analyses.

The building official sometimes needs to rely on evaluation reports, analyses or other types of reports that purport to validate the use of a material, system or method as complying with the code. This definition establishes that the building official needs to rely on independent, competent individuals or agencies as the source of these reports.

## AREA (for masonry).

GROSS CROSS-SECTIONAL. The area delineated by the out-to-out specified dimensions of masonry in the plane under consideration.

NET CROSS-SECTIONAL. The area of masonry units, grout and mortar crossed by the plane under consideration based on out-to-out specified dimensions.

Various areas are used for structural calculations in Chapter 21. It is important to use the appropriate areas required by the code, since they may give dramatically different results. The gross cross-sectional area of the masonry is the specified masonry width (thickness) multiplied by the specified length, as illustrated in Commentary Figure 202(4). While subtraction of core areas of the masonry unit is not required, the space between wythes must be discounted in noncomposite walls. Empirical compressive stress design is based on the gross cross-sectional area of the masonry.

The net cross-sectional area encompasses the area of units, grout and mortar contained within the plane under consideration. For ungouted masonry, this area is sometimes equal to the bedded area, or more often to the minimum specified area of the face shells. For grouted masonry, this also includes that area of cores, cells or spaces filled with grout.

AREA, BUILDING. The area included within surrounding exterior walls (or exterior walls and fire walls) exclusive of vent shafts and courts. Areas of the building not provided with surrounding

===== Page 0077 =====
walls shall be included in the building area if such areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above.

Allowable building areas (as established by the provisions of Chapter 5 and Table 506.2) are a function of the potential fire hazard and the level of fire endurance of the building's structural elements, as established for the types of construction in Chapter 6. A building area is the "footprint" of the building; that is, the area measured within the perimeter formed by the inside surface of the exterior walls. This excludes spaces that are inside this perimeter and open to the outside atmosphere at the top, such as open shafts and courts (see Section 1205). Where a portion of the building has no exterior walls, the area regulated by Chapter 5 is defined by the projection of the roof or floor above [see Commentary Figure 202(5)]. The roof overhang on portions of a building where there are exterior enclosure walls does not add to the building area because the area is defined by exterior walls.

AREA OF REFUGE. An area where persons unable to use stairways can remain temporarily to await instructions or assistance during emergency evacuation.

The area of refuge is a temporary waiting area used during emergency evacuations for persons who are unable to exit the building using the stairways. The fire safety plans (in accordance with Section 404 of SBC 801) include the locations of areas of refuge so that the fire department will know where people may be waiting for rescue assistance. See Section 1009 for where areas of refuge are required at stairways and elevators. Areas of refuge have requirements for separation, size, signage, instructional information and two-way communication systems.

AREA OF SPORT ACTIVITY. That portion of an indoor or outdoor space where the play or practice of a sport occurs.

The broad term, “area of sports activity,” addresses indoor and outdoor courts, fields and other sport areas. Examples are basketball and tennis courts; practice areas for dance or gymnastics; baseball, soccer and football fields; skating rinks; running tracks; and skateboard parks. The application of the phrase “portion where the play or practice of a sport occurs,” varies depending on the sports. Football fields include the playing field boundary lines, the end zones and the space between the boundary lines and safety border. Players may run or be pushed into this safety zone during play. In football, this safety zone is used as part of the playing field and is therefore included in the area of sports activity. See the
commentary to Section 1111 regarding the general accessible route allowances for areas of sports activity. Some of the areas listed under the recreational facilities addressed in Section 1111 (i.e., bowling lanes, exercise equipment facilities, miniature golf, and pools) are considered areas of sports activity; however, they have additional requirements.

AREAWAY. A subsurface space adjacent to a building open at the top or protected at the top by a grating or guard.

Areaways are often constructed to provide access to below-grade building services, including transformers, ventilation shafts and pipe tunnels.

ASSEMBLY SEATING, MULTILEVEL. See "Multilevel assembly seating."

ATRIUM. A vertical space that is closed at the top, connecting two or more stories in Group I-2 and I-3 occupancies or three or more stories in all other occupancies.

This definition identifies that an atrium is a floor opening or a series of floor openings connecting the environments of adjacent stories. These openings are typically three stories; however, in Group I-2 and I-3 occupancies they are limited to two stories because these facilities typically use smoke compartments and a defend-in-place strategy for fire protection. An atrium can include elevators and open stairways. Such elements would need to be entirely within the atrium to meet the separation requirements found in Section 404.6. An atrium is not defined by size or use. A series of floor openings that are enclosed with exterior walls, yet open at the roof, would be considered a court and would be exempt from the requirements of Section 404. Balconies associated with assembly occupancies and mezzanines are not considered individual stories that would contribute to the classification of a space as an atrium.

ATTIC. The space between the ceiling framing of the top story and the underside of the roof.

This definition identifies the portion of a building or structure that must meet requirements specific to attics, such as ventilation (see Section 1202) and draftstopping (see Section 718). Additionally, the code has access requirements (see Section 1208) and uniformly distributed live load requirements (see Table 1607.1) for attics. An attic is considered the space or area located immediately below the roof sheathing within the roof framing system of a building. Pitched roof systems, such as gabled, hip, sawtoothed or curved roofs, all create spaces

===== Page 0078 =====
between the roof sheathing and ceiling membrane, which are considered attics.

AUDIBLE ALARM NOTIFICATION
APPLIANCE. A notification appliance that alerts by the sense of hearing.

Audible alarms that are part of a fire alarm system must be loud enough to be heard in every occupied space of a building. Section 907.5.2.1.1 prescribes the minimum sound pressure level for all audible alarm notification appliances depending on the occupancy of the building and the function of the space.

AUTOMATIC. As applied to fire protection devices, a device or system providing an emergency function without the necessity for human intervention and activated as a result of a predetermined temperature rise, rate of temperature rise or combustion products.

This term, when used in conjunction with fire protection systems or devices, means that the system or device will perform its intended function without a person being present or performing any task in its control or operation. The device or system has the inherent capability to detect a developing fire condition and perform some predetermined function.

AUTOMATIC FIRE-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. An approved system of devices and equipment which automatically detects a fire and discharges an approved fire-extinguishing agent onto or in the area of a fire.

This term is the generic name for all types of automatic fire-extinguishing systems, including the most common type—the automatic sprinkler system. See Section 904 for requirements for particular alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems, such as wet-chemical, dry-chemical, foam, carbon dioxide, Halon and clean-agent systems.

AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTION SYSTEM. A fire alarm system that has initiation devices that utilize smoke detectors for protection of an area such as a room or space with detectors to provide early warning of fire.

Chapter 9 provides requirements for various automatic protection systems including: "automatic fire detection system," "automatic sprinkler system," "automatic fire alarm system" and "automatic smoke detection system." Automatic smoke detection systems are required for various occupancies as specified in Section 907. They are required to increase the likelihood that fire is detected, and occupants of the building are given an early warning.

AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEM. An automatic sprinkler system, for fire protection purposes, is an integrated system of underground and overhead piping designed in accordance with fire protection engineering standards. The system includes a suitable water supply. The portion of the system above the ground is a network of specially sized or hydraulically designed piping installed in a structure or area, generally overhead, and to which automatic sprinklers are connected in a systematic pattern. The system is usually activated by heat from a fire and discharges water over the fire area.

An automatic sprinkler system is one type of automatic fire-extinguishing system. Automatic sprinkler systems are the most common, and their life safety attributes are widely recognized. The code specifies three types of automatic sprinkler systems: one installed in accordance with NFPA 13, one in accordance with NFPA 13R and the other in accordance with NFPA 13D. To be considered for most code design alternatives, a building's automatic sprinkler system must be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13 (see Section 903.3.1.1).

In a fire, sprinklers automatically open and discharge water onto the fire in a spray pattern that is designed to contain or extinguish the fire. Originally, automatic sprinkler systems were developed just for the protection of buildings and their contents. Because of the development and improvements in sprinkler head response time and water distribution, however, automatic sprinkler systems are now also considered life safety systems. Proper operation of an automatic sprinkler system requires careful selection of the sprinkler heads so that water in sufficient quantity, at adequate pressure and properly distributed will be available to suppress the fire. Note that the use of the term "fire area" in the last sentence of the definition refers to the area in which the fire is occurring, not to the defined term "Fire area."

There are many different types of automatic sprinkler systems—wet pipe, dry pipe, preaction, antifreeze and various combinations. Sprinklers can be pendant, upright or sidewall and can be designed for standard or extended coverage. Additional information can be found in NFPA 13.

AUTOMATIC WATER MIST SYSTEM. A system consisting of a water supply, a pressure source, and a distribution piping system with attached nozzles, which, at or above a minimum operating pressure, defined by its listing, discharges water in fine droplets meeting the requirements of NFPA 750 for the purpose of the control, suppression or extinguishment of a fire. Such systems include wet-pipe, dry-pipe and pre-action types. The systems are designed as engineered, pre-engineered, local-application or total flooding

===== Page 0079 =====
## systems.

The code recognizes water mist systems as an alternative extinguishing system to automatic sprinkler systems. However, no exceptions, reductions, or “tradeoffs” for water mist systems are granted or permitted by the code because such systems are not considered to be equivalent to automatic sprinkler systems. Automatic water mist systems have been approved by FM Global for occupancies similar to Light Hazard (as defined by NFPA 13) and listed by UL for occupancies similar to Ordinary Hazard Group I (as defined by NFPA 13). These listings permit automatic water mist systems to be installed as the primary suppression system in a variety of occupancy classifications.

Water mist systems create a heat-absorbent vapor consisting of water droplets with a size of less than 1000 microns at the discharge nozzle. These systems are typically used where water damage may be an issue, or where water supplies are limited. The droplet size can be controlled by adjusting the discharge pressure through the nozzle. By creating a mist, an equal volume of water will create a larger total surface area exposed to the fire and thus better facilitate the absorption of heat, allowing more water droplets to turn to steam more quickly and thus more effectively cool the room.

AVERAGE AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL. The root mean square, A-weighted sound pressure level measured over a 24-hour period, or the time any person is present, whichever time period is less.

The ambient noise that can be expected depends on the occupancy of the building. To attract the attention of the occupants, the audible alarm devices must be heard above the ambient noise in the space. For this reason, the alarm devices must have minimum sound pressure levels above the average ambient sound level. Section 907.5.2.1.1 prescribes the minimum sound pressure levels for audible alarm notification appliances for all occupancy conditions.

Although it is possible to measure the ambient sound within an occupied space, alarm notification devices are usually designed and installed before buildings are occupied, thus it is typically a careful analysis of the types of uses within a space that will determine the average ambient sound level. If, after the building is occupied, the alarm notification devices are below expected audibility, a field measurement may be necessary to determine whether the design assumptions were correct.

AWNING. An architectural projection that provides weather protection, identity or decoration and is partially or wholly supported by the building to which it is attached. An awning is composed of a lightweight frame structure over which a covering is attached.

Similar to a canopy, an awning typically provides weather protection, signage or decoration. Its distinguishing characteristic is the lightweight frame structure. It is also supported, at least in part, by the building from which it projects. See Section 3105 for general requirements and Section 3202 for encroachment requirements. This definition helps to clarify the applicability of roof loads in Section 1607.14.3. Also see the definitions to "Retractable awning," "Canopy" and "Marquee."

BACKING. The wall or surface to which the veneer is secured.

Backing is the portion of a structure that provides support for exterior veneer. Backing also typically resists lateral and transverse loads imposed by veneer and may be load bearing or nonload bearing.

BALANCED DOOR. A door equipped with double-pivoted hardware so designed as to cause a semi counterbalanced swing action when opening.

Balanced doors are commonly used to decrease the force necessary to open the door or to reduce the length of the door swing. Balanced doors typically reduce the clear opening width more than normally hinged doors [see Commentary Figure 202(6) and Section 1010.2.9.4]

BALED COTTON. A natural seed fiber wrapped in and secured with industry accepted materials, usually consisting of burlap, woven polypropylene, polyethylene or cotton or sheet polyethylene, and secured with steel, synthetic or wire bands or wire; also includes linters (lint removed from the cottonseed) and mites (residual materials from the ginning process).

This definition of standard “Baled cotton” is being included only to distinguish it from “Baled cotton, densely packed” (see the commentary to the definition of “Baled cotton, densely packed”). The Joint Cotton Industry Bale Packaging Committee (JCIBPC) represents all parts of the cotton industry and sets standards and specifications for packaging of cotton bales, including bale density. The JCIBPC specifications for baling of cotton require that all cotton bales be secured with fixed-length wire bands, polyester plastic strapping or cold-rolled, high-tensile steel strapping, then covered in fully coated woven polyolefin, polyethylene film or burlap.

BALED COTTON, DENSELY PACKED. Cotton made into banded bales with a packing

===== Page 0080 =====
density of not less than 360 kg per  \( m^{3} \) , and dimensions complying with the following: a length of 1400 mm, a width of 550 mm and a height of 700 to 900 mm.

Currently, over 99 percent of all U.S. cotton is pressed and stored as densely packed baled cotton, with bales meeting the weight and dimension requirements of ISO 8115. Because such bales are very difficult to ignite, the industry is able to transport them without being labeled as "flammable solids" or "dangerous goods" by national or international transport authorities. This definition is intended to be used to distinguish such bales from other combustible fibers.

In order to counteract some erroneous information regarding the combustibility characteristics of densely packed cotton bales, flammability research was conducted on baled cotton. The research demonstrated that densely packed baled cotton meeting the size and weight requirements of ISO 8115 is not a hazardous material. The research conclusions were:

1 Standard cotton fiber “passed” the Department of Transportation’s spontaneous combustion test: the cotton did not exceed the oven temperature and was not classified as self-heating.

2 Cotton, as densely packed baled cotton, did not cause sustained smoldering propagation: an electric heater placed within the bales was unable to cause sustained smoldering propagation, because of the lack of oxygen inside the densely packed bale.

3 Cotton, as densely packed baled cotton, was exposed to ignition from a cigarette and a match and performed very well: no propagating combustion with either.

4 Cotton, as densely packed baled cotton, was exposed to ignition from the gas burner source in ASTM E1590 (also known as California Technical Bulletin 129) of 12 L/min of propane gas for 180 seconds and passed all the criteria, including mass loss of less than 1.36 kg, heat release rate less than 100 kW and total heat release of less than 25 MJ in the first 10 minutes of the test.

BALLAST. In roofing, ballast comes in the form of large stones or paver systems or lightweight interlocking paver systems and is used to provide uplift resistance for roofing systems that are not adhered or mechanically attached to the roof deck.

Ballast is a material, usually stone or concrete, that is used specifically to provide uplift resistance for roof coverings that are not otherwise attached to the structure.

BARRICADE. A structure that consists of a combination of walls, floor and roof, which is designed to withstand the rapid release of energy in an explosion and which is fully confined, partially vented or fully vented; or other effective method of shielding from explosive materials by a natural or artificial barrier.

ARTIFICIAL BARRICADE. An artificial mound or revetment a minimum thickness of 900 mm.

NATURAL BARRICADE. Natural features of the ground, such as hills, or timber of sufficient density that the surrounding exposures that require protection cannot be seen from the magazine or building containing explosives when the trees are bare of leaves.

This definition describes the effective screening of a building containing explosives by means of natural or artificial barrier from a magazine, another building, a railway or a highway. Where suitable natural features do not exist to protect adjacent people and structures from flying debris and blast effects in the event of an explosion in a magazine, an artificial barrier must be constructed. For further information, see Chapter 56 of SBC 801.

BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

This term is used to define the land area along a body of water that is subject to flooding and within which flood-resistant design and construction requirements are applied. Typically, an authority, such as FEMA, prepares flood hazard maps. In doing so, the base flood is derived by applying hydrologic models or by examining regional or local flood history to determine the 1-percent annual chance event, also referred to as the "100-year flood."

BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

The base flood elevation is the height to which floodwaters are predicted to rise during passage or occurrence of the base flood. It is determined using commonly accepted computer models that estimate hydrologic and hydraulic conditions to determine the 1-percent annual chance (base) flood. Along rivers and streams, statistical methods and computer models may be used to estimate runoff and to develop flood elevations. The models take into consideration watershed characteristics, and the shape and nature of the flood plain, including natural ground contours and the presence of buildings, bridges and culverts.

===== Page 0081 =====
Along coastal areas, base flood elevations may be developed using models that take into account offshore bathymetry, historical storms and typical wind patterns. In many coastal areas, the base flood elevation includes wave heights.

BASEMENT. A story that is not a story above grade plane (see “Story above grade plane”). This definition of “Basement” does not apply to the provisions of Section 1612 for flood loads.

A basement is defined as a story that has its floor surface below the adjoining ground level and that does not qualify as a story above grade plane (see the commentary to the definition of "Story above grade plane"). Commentary Figure 202(7) illustrates the application of the definition of "Story above grade plane." Since a basement is not a story above grade, it does not contribute to the height of the building for the purpose of applying the allowable building height in stories from Table 504.4. This definition of "Basement" applies to all sections of the code except for flood loads.

Basements in buildings that are located in flood hazard areas and subject to flood loads are defined differently than this general definition [see the definition of “Basement (for flood loads)”.

BASEMENT (for flood loads). The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. This definition of “Basement” is limited in application.

ASCE 24 specifies that lowest floors (see definition, "Lowest floor"), including the floors of basements that are below grade on all sides, must be elevated to or above the elevations required by ASCE 24, which vary based on the Flood Design Class and flood zone. The 2014 edition of ASCE 24 defines and uses Flood Design Class, rather than risk or occupancy category, and this code requires designers to identify the Flood Design Class assigned per ASCE 24 (see Section 1603.1.7). Buildings that are specifically designed to be dry floodproofed in accordance with ASCE 24 may have their lowest floors (including basements) below the elevation required by ASCE 24. In terms of National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) flood insurance, buildings with basements (below grade on all sides) are subject to higher premium rates.

BEARING WALL STRUCTURE. A building or other structure in which vertical loads from floors and roofs are primarily supported by walls.

This definition describes the structure types that are covered under Section 1616.3.

BED JOINT. The horizontal layer of mortar on which a masonry unit is laid.
This is a horizontal mortar joint [see Commentary Figure 202(8)] that separates a course of masonry units from the ones above and supports the weight of the masonry. Unlike the head or collar joint, it is easily closed when the masonry unit is placed. For a masonry unit in the typical (stretcher) orientation, the bed joint faces are the top and bottom, while the bed surface of the masonry unit is the underside. A special type of bed joint is the base-course joint or starting joint placed over foundations.

BLEACHERS. Tiered seating supported on a dedicated structural system and two or more rows high and is not a building element (see "Grandstand").

Bleachers, folding and telescopic seating, and grandstands are essentially unique forms of tiered seating that are supported on a dedicated structural system. All types are addressed in ICC 300, Standard on Bleachers, Folding and Telescopic Seating and Grandstands (see Section 1030.1.1). Bleachers can have backrests or just seatboards. "Building element" is a defined term that is primarily used in conjunction with the structural elements regulated in Table 601. Bleachers have a separate structural system and are not considered a building element of the building or structure in which they are located. An individual bench seat directly attached to a floor system is not a bleacher. The terms "bleacher" and "grandstand" are basically interchangeable. There is no cutoff in size or number of seats that separates bleachers and grandstands.

BOARDING HOUSE. A building arranged or used for lodging for compensation, with or without meals, and not occupied as a single-family unit.

A boarding house is a structure in which the occupants are provided sleeping accommodations or meals and accommodations for a fee. The individual rooms used usually do not contain all of the permanent living provisions of a dwelling unit (e.g., permanent cooking facilities). Most often, the term “boarding house” describes a facility that is primarily for transient occupants; however, these facilities might also be used for nontransient purposes. Depending on the extent of transiency, a boarding house could be classified as Group R-1, when an occupant typically stays for not more than 30 days, or Group R-2, when the length of stay is greater than 30 days [see Section 310 and Commentary Figure 202(9)]. Boarding houses are distinct from Lodging houses. Lodging houses allow transient guests within a residence that is also occupied by the owner or

===== Page 0082 =====
primary residents of the dwelling unit. Lodging houses are classified as Group R-3.

BOILING POINT. The temperature at which the vapor pressure of a liquid equals the atmospheric pressure of 101.3 kPa or 760 mm of mercury. Where an accurate boiling point is unavailable for the material in question, or for mixtures which do not have a constant boiling point, for the purposes of this classification, the 20-percent evaporated point of a distillation performed in accordance with ASTM D86 shall be used as the boiling point of the liquid.

The boiling point of a liquid is significant in determining the appropriate division for Class I flammable liquids. Temperatures above the established boiling point for a given liquid would result in the atmospheric pressure no longer being able to keep the liquid in a liquid state. Liquids with low boiling points present a greater fire hazard because of the increased vapor pressure at normal ambient temperatures.

BRACED WALL LINE. A straight line through the building plan that represents the location of the lateral resistance provided by the wall bracing.

A braced wall line consists of conventionally framed braced wall panels that provide lateral support for buildings constructed in accordance with the prescriptive conventional construction provisions of Section 2308.

BRACED WALL PANEL. A full-height section of wall constructed to resist in-plane shear loads through interaction of framing members, sheathing material and anchors. The panel's length meets the requirements of its particular bracing method and contributes toward the total amount of bracing required along its braced wall line.

A braced wall panel is a segment of a braced wall line that is constructed in accordance with one of the bracing methods that are permitted in Section 2308. Braced wall panels are similar to shear walls but are designed by prescriptive rules rather than engineered like shear walls.

BREAKOUT. For revolving doors, a process whereby wings or door panels can be pushed open manually for means of egress travel.

In addition to swinging doors in the immediate area, revolving doors have a breakout feature as an additional safety requirement. The panels in the door can be operated manually to collapse or fold in the direction of egress during an emergency. This increases the number of people that could exit per minute compared to using the revolving door in the standard manner.

## BRICK.

Brick is composed of masonry units that are generally prismatic (rectangular) in shape. CALCIUM SILICATE (SAND LIME BRICK). A pressed and subsequently autoclaved unit that consists of sand and lime, with or without the inclusion of other materials.

This solid brick unit is made principally from high-silica sand and lime.

CLAY OR SHALE. A solid or hollow masonry unit of clay or shale, usually formed into a rectangular prism, then burned or fired in a kiln; brick is a ceramic product.

These masonry units are manufactured from surface clay, shale or fire clay. Different manufacturing processes and physical properties are associated with each material. Surface clays are found in sedimentary layers near the surface. Shales are clays subjected to geologic pressure, resulting in a solid state similar to slate. Fire clays are mined from deeper layers, resulting in more uniform properties. These units are formed into the desired shape by extrusion, molding or pressing. They are then fired in a kiln to increase their strength and durability.

CONCRETE. A concrete masonry unit made from Portland cement, water, and suitable aggregates, with or without the inclusion of other materials.

Concrete brick units are made from a zero-slump mix of Portland cement (and possibly other cementitious materials), aggregates, water and admixtures. These units are solid or have a shallow depression called a "frog." Slump brick, for example, is a decorative concrete brick with bulged sides resulting from the consistency of the mix and the manufacturing process.

BUILDING. Any structure utilized or intended for supporting or sheltering any occupancy.

The code uses this term to identify those structures that provide shelter for a function or activity. See the definition of "Area, building" for situations where a single structure may be two or more "Buildings" created by fire walls.

BUILDING AREA. See “Area, building.”

BUILDING ELEMENT. A fundamental component of building construction, specified in Table 601, which may or may not be of fire-resistance-rated construction and is constructed of materials based on the building type of construction.

Building elements include primary structural members, secondary structural members, exterior walls and interior partitions. The fire-resistance ratings of the elements are found in Tables 601 and Table 705.5.

BUILDING HEIGHT. See “Height, building.”

BUILDING LINE. The line established by law, beyond which a building shall not extend, except as specifically provided by law.

===== Page 0083 =====
This term defines the limitations or boundaries for construction of a building. This line is typically established by a zoning statute or rights-of-way dedication and is not specified in the code.

BUILDING OFFICIAL. an officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of SBC or a duly authorized representative. The municipal authority will act as the building official in application and administration of the code. The National Committee will be responsible to render technical interpretations and application of sections 104.10 and 104.11 of the SBC 201.

## BUILDING-INTEGRATED

PHOTOVOLTAIC (BIPV) PRODUCT. A building product that incorporates photovoltaic modules and functions as a component of the building envelope.

This definition clarifies which photovoltaic products must comply with the roof covering fire classifications required in Section 1505.

## BUILDING-INTEGRATED

PHOTOVOLTAIC ROOF PANEL (BIPV ROOF PANEL). A photovoltaic panel that functions as a component of the building envelope.

These panels are similar to photovoltaic shingles but are significantly larger. They are part of the building envelope as opposed to sitting on frames above the roof.

BUILT-UP ROOF COVERING. Two or more layers of felt cemented together and surfaced with a cap sheet, mineral aggregate, smooth coating or similar surfacing material.

Because of their low melting points and self-healing characteristics, built-up roofs are typically constructed of coal tar membranes that are commonly installed on roofs with little or no slope.

CANOPY. A permanent structure or architectural projection of rigid construction over which a covering is attached that provides weather protection, identity or decoration. A canopy is permitted to be structurally independent or supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides.

A canopy can be either an architectural projection from a building or an independent structure. Examples of the former might be found covering entrance walkways in front of hotels, apartment buildings, or upscale restaurants (see the commentary figures in Chapter 31). An example of the latter is a canopy built over fuel pumps at a gasoline station. This definition distinguishes a canopy from an awning, which consists of a lightweight frame that is supported by the building from which it projects. In doing so, the definition clarifies the applicability of roof loads in 1607.14.3 (see Section 3105 for general requirements and Section 3202 for encroachment requirements).

## CAPACITOR ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEM.

A stationary, rechargeable energy storage system consisting of capacitors, chargers, controls and associated electrical equipment designed to provide electrical power to a building or facility. The system is typically used to provide standby or emergency power, an uninterruptible power supply, load shedding, load sharing or similar capabilities.

Section 307.1.1, Exception 16 would allow such systems to be installed without requiring classification as Group H. This is similar to the exception for stationary storage battery systems (Exception 9) and stationary fuel cell power systems (Exception 15). Section 1206.3 of SBC 801 regulates capacitor energy storage systems where the capacity exceeds 3 kWh. Chapter 12 of SBC 801 addresses stationary storage battery systems and stationary fuel cell power systems as well. This definition makes clear what specifically is being regulated. These types of systems are of concern without regulation due to the amount of energy they store and how they increase fire risk and pose a risk to fire fighters. These systems are being installed in new and existing buildings.

## CARBON DIOXIDE EXTINGUISHING

SYSTEMS. A system supplying carbon dioxide ( \( CO_{2} \) ) from a pressurized vessel through fixed pipes and nozzles. The system includes a manual- or automatic-actuating mechanism.

Carbon dioxide ( \( CO_{2} \) ) extinguishing systems are useful in extinguishing fires in specific hazards or equipment in occupancies where an inert electrically nonconductive medium is essential or desirable and where cleanup of other extinguishing agents, such as dry-chemical residue, presents a problem. The system works by displacing the oxygen in an enclosed area by flooding the space with  \( CO_{2} \) . To effectively flood the enclosure, automatic door and window closers and control dampers for the mechanical ventilation system must be installed.

These types of gaseous extinguishing systems have some inherent disadvantages that should be considered before selection. Because the oxygen is being displaced, occupants should not be in the space for a period after discharge, depending on the concentration of  \( CO_{2} \)  to be achieved. Additionally, the discharge rate can result in a rapid increase in pressure within the space where the system is discharged. Where water is not a desired means of suppression,  \( CO_{2} \)  and other gaseous suppression systems

===== Page 0084 =====
can be very effective. NFPA 12 contains minimum requirements for the design, installation, testing, inspection, approval, operation and maintenance of carbon dioxide extinguishing systems.

CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM. A single- or multiple-station alarm intended to detect carbon monoxide gas and alert occupants by a distinct audible signal. It incorporates a sensor, control components and an alarm notification appliance in a single unit.

The definitions of “Carbon monoxide alarm” and “Carbon monoxide detector” were provided to differentiate between the two types of detection devices. Both terms are used in Section 915 and are addressed by different standards. Alarms must comply with UL 2034, whereas detectors, which are part of a larger system and are simply sensors that transmit a signal to the system, are required to comply with UL 2075.

CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR. A device with an integral sensor to detect carbon monoxide gas and transmit an alarm signal to a connected alarm control unit.

See commentary for definition of “Carbon monoxide alarm.” Also note that carbon monoxide detection systems are required by Section 915.5.1 to comply with NFPA 720.

CARE SUITE. In Group I-2 occupancies, a group of treatment rooms, care recipient sleeping rooms and the support rooms or spaces and circulation space within the suite where staff are in attendance for supervision of all care recipients within the suite, and the suite is in compliance with the requirements of Section 407.4.4.

Care suites are designed to allow for a group of rooms to function as a unit in the treatment and care of care recipients. Suites provide flexibility in reaching an exit access. Use of suites is a particularly useful tool at intensive care units and emergency departments in patient treatment areas. Suites allow staff to have clear and unobstructed supervision of care recipients in specific treatment and sleeping rooms through the elimination of corridor width or rating requirements. The term is not intended to apply to day rooms or business sections of the hospital. This term is only applicable to suites of patient rooms in Group I-2 occupancies and should not be confused with similar layouts in other parts of the hospital or within other occupancies that may be referred to as a "suite." Care suites are to meet the requirements of Section 407.

CAST STONE. A building stone manufactured from Portland cement concrete precast and used as a trim, veneer or facing on or in buildings or structures.

Cast stone is a simulated stone precast from Portland cement concrete. This material is typically used for veneer, but can also be used in other applications.

CEILING LIMIT. The maximum concentration of an air-borne contaminant to which one may be exposed. The ceiling limits utilized are those published in DOL 29 CFR Part 1910.1000. The ceiling Recommended Exposure Limit (REL-C) concentrations published by the U.S. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), Threshold Limit Value—Ceiling (TLV-C) concentrations published by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH), Ceiling Workplace Environmental Exposure Level (WEEI-Ceiling) Guides published by the American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA), and other approved, consistent measures are allowed as surrogates for hazardous substances not listed in DOL 29 CFR Part 1910.1000.

This term is used in Section 916.8 and indicates the threshold at which a gas detection system is required for highly toxic and toxic materials. It represents the maximum level of exposure for employees or occupants to hazardous air contaminants during any part of a normal workday. DOL 29 CFR Part 1910.1000 provides acceptable ceiling limits of contamination for various substances.

CEILING RADIATION DAMPER. A listed device installed in a ceiling membrane of a fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assembly to limit automatically the radiative heat transfer through an air inlet/outlet opening. Ceiling radiation dampers include air terminal units, ceiling dampers and ceiling air diffusers. Ceiling radiation dampers are classified for use in either static systems that will automatically shut down in the event of a fire, or in dynamic systems that continue to operate during a fire. A dynamic ceiling radiation damper is tested and rated for closure under elevated temperature airflow.

A type of damper placed at penetrations in a rated ceiling for the purpose of reducing the passage of rising radiant heat from a fire through openings in the ceiling and the increased risk from extreme high temperatures on the protected side of the ceiling membrane. Ceiling radiation dampers are one of the options provided for membrane penetrations in horizontal assemblies, and an alternate option to fire dampers in through penetrations per Exception 5 of Section 717.6.1. Their testing and installation are governed by Section 717.6.2.1.

CELL (Group I-3 occupancy). A room within a

===== Page 0085 =====
housing unit in a detention or correctional facility used to confine inmates or prisoners.

Cells are the smallest unit in the portion of a Group I-3 prison or jail for the housing of inmates. In contrast to other occupancies, many of the provisions in Section 408 refer to cells. Requirements for Group I-3 occupancies in other chapters may refer to cells that are parts of housing units as "sleeping units."

CELL (MASONRY). A void space having a gross cross-sectional area greater than 1000 mm \( ^{2} \) .

This term defines a large intentional void within a masonry unit. Grout and reinforcing steel are often placed in cells to form reinforced masonry.

CELL TIER. Levels of cells vertically stacked above one another within a housing unit.

Atier is one level of cells. There can be multiple tiers within a single housing unit as well as more than one cell tier within a story [see the commentary for “Cell (Group I-3 occupancy)”].

CEMENT PLASTER. A mixture of Portland or blended cement, Portland cement or blended cement and hydrated lime, masonry cement or plastic cement and aggregate and other approved materials as specified in this code.

Cement plaster (often referred to as "stucco") is a cementitious-based plaster material with excellent water-resistant properties. It is the only type of plaster that is permitted by the code to be used as an exterior wall covering and as a base coat and finish coat. Cement plaster can also be used as an interior finish wall covering, but is required by the code to be used in all interior wet areas such as toilet rooms, showers, saunas, steam rooms, indoor swimming pools or any other area that will be exposed to excessive amounts of moisture or humidity for prolonged periods of time.

CERAMIC FIBER BLANKET. A high-temperature mineral wool insulation material made of alumina-silica ceramic or calcium magnesium silicate soluble fibers and weighing 65 to 160 kg per m \( ^{3} \) .

This form of insulation is used in conjunction with the provisions of Section 722.2.1.3.1, where joints in precast walls must be insulated (protected) in order to maintain the fire-resistance integrity of the precast wall panel (see Figure 722.2.1.3.1).

CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certificate stating that materials and products meet specified standards or that work was done in compliance with approved construction documents.

A certificate of compliance is a document issued by a supplier of materials and products that certifies the products and materials meet the specified requirements.
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY. Either of the following shall be considered as a change of occupancy where this code requires a greater degree of safety, accessibility, structural strength, fire protection, means of egress, ventilation or sanitation than is existing in the current building or structure:

1 Any change in the occupancy classification of a building or structure.

2 Any change in the purpose of, or a change in the level of activity within, a building or structure.

This term describes the condition where an existing building or structure is used for a different use or the same use where: (1) there is a change in a building's purpose or level of activity; (2) that functional change is such that the current SBC 201 requires a greater degree of regulation than presently exists in the current building; and (3) the greater degree of regulation required by the current SBC 201 occurs only in the areas of accessibility, structural strength, fire protection, means of egress, ventilation or sanitation. The intent is to limit the application of a change of occupancy where there is no change in classification to only those new uses that present a higher risk to the life safety or welfare of the occupants than was created by the previous use (see Section 101.4.7 for a reference to SBC 901). This term is only applicable to existing buildings, never new ones. For example, Group B includes both beauty parlors and post offices. Where a beauty shop moved into an old office, while remaining a Group B building, it would an increase in the level of activity; therefore, this would be considered a change of occupancy.

CHIMNEY. A primarily vertical structure containing one or more flues, for the purpose of carrying gaseous products of combustion and air from a fuel-burning appliance to the outdoor atmosphere.

SBC 1201 and SBC 501 address the installation of chimneys and venting systems that are required to convey products of combustion from fuel-burning appliances to the atmosphere. The code regulates the construction of masonry chimneys in Section 2113. Chimneys differ from metal vents in the materials from which they are constructed and the type of appliance they are designed to serve. Chimneys can vent much hotter flue gases than metal vents.

FACTORY-BUILT CHIMNEY. A listed and labeled chimney composed of factory-made components, assembled in the field in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and the conditions

===== Page 0086 =====
of the listing.

A factory-built chimney is a manufactured, listed and labeled chimney that has been tested by an approved agency to determine its performance characteristics. Factory-built chimneys are manufactured in two basic designs: a double-wall insulated design, or a triple-wall air-cooled design. Both designs use stainless steel inner liners to resist the corrosive effects of combustion products.

MASONRY CHIMNEY. A field-constructed chimney composed of solid masonry units, bricks, stones, or concrete.

Masorny chimneys can have one or more flues within them, and are field constructed of brick, stone, concrete or fire-clay materials. Masorny chimneys can stand alone or be part of a masonry fireplace.

METAL CHIMNEY. A field-constructed chimney of metal.

A metal chimney is an unlisted chimney constructed and installed in accordance with NFPA 211 and is sometimes referred to as a 'smokestack.' Metal chimneys are typically field constructed and installed in industrial structures.

## CHIMNEY TYPES.

Provisions for several types of chimneys are contained in Chapter 21, as described below. The construction of the chimney is affected by the type of appliance and the temperature of the flue gases that are generated.

High-heat appliance type. An approved chimney for removing the products of combustion from fuel-burning, high-heat appliances producing combustion gases in excess of  \( 1100^{\circ} \) C measured at the appliance flue outlet (see Section 2113.11.3).

High-heat chimneys are used in industrial applications, such as incinerators, kilns and blast furnaces. Section 2113.11.3 contains requirements for the construction and installation of chimneys for high-heat appliances.

LOW-HEAT APPLIANCE TYPE. An approved chimney for removing the products of combustion from fuel-burning, low-heat appliances producing combustion gases not in excess of  \( 540^{\circ} \) C under normal operating conditions, but capable of producing combustion gases of  \( 760^{\circ} \) C during intermittent forces firing for periods up to 1 hour. Temperatures shall be measured at the appliance flue outlet.

Most domestic fuel-burning appliances are low-heat appliances. Low-heat appliances include solid fuel-burning appliances, such as room heaters and wood stoves. Section 2113 contains requirements for the construction and installation of chimneys for low-heat appliances.

MASONRY TYPE. A field-constructed chimney of solid masonry units or stones.

Masorny chimneys can have one or more flues and are field constructed of masonry units, stone, concrete and fired-clay materials. Masorny chimneys can stand alone or be part of a masonry fireplace. Section 2113 contains requirements for the construction and installation of masonry chimneys. Most masonry chimneys require a chimney liner that is resistant to heat and the corrosive action of the products of combustion. Chimney liners are generally made of fired-clay tile, refractory brick, poured-inplace refractory materials or stainless steel.

MEDIUM-HEAT APPLIANCE TYPE. An approved chimney for removing the products of combustion from fuel-burning, medium-heat appliances producing combustion gases not exceeding  \( 1100^{\circ} \) C measured at the appliance flue outlet (see Section 2113.11.2).

Some examples of medium-heat appliances are annealing furnaces, galvanizing furnaces, pulp dryers and charcoal furnaces. Section 2113.11.2 contains requirements for the construction and installation of chimneys for medium-heat appliances.

CIRCULATION PATH. An exterior or interior way of passage from one place to another for pedestrians.

Examples of circulation paths include sidewalks, walkways, corridors, aisles, courtyards, ramps, stairways and landings. While a stairway is never part of an accessible route, it can be part of a general circulation path for ambulatory persons. Not all floor areas are circulation paths. What part of a floor is not a circulation path will be subjective. For example, where a drinking fountain is moved into an alcove, it has been moved off the circulation path. So, while still being over a floor, it is no longer considered a protruding object.

CLEAN AGENT. Electrically nonconducting, volatile or gaseous fire extinguishant that does not leave a residue upon vaporization.

The two categories of clean agents are halocarbon compounds and inert gas agents. Halocarbon compounds include bromine, carbon, chloride, fluorine, hydrogen and iodine. Halocarbon compounds suppress the fire through a combination of breaking the chemical chain reaction of the fire, reducing the ambient oxygen supporting the fire and reducing the ambient temperature of the fire origin to reduce the propagation of fire. The clean agents that are inert gas agents contain primary components consisting of helium, neon

===== Page 0087 =====
or argon, or a combination of all three. Inert gases work by reducing the oxygen concentration around the fire origin to a level that does not support combustion (see commentary, Section 904.10).

CLIMATE ZONE. A geographical region that has been assigned climatic criteria as specified in Figure 1404.3(1) and Figure 1404.3(2).

Each region is assigned a climate zone. Figure 1404.3(1) and Figure 1404.3(2) provide a list of each region of Saudi Arabia with the designated climate zone. These designations are also mapped. Climate zone is used to determine the requirements for a building's thermal envelope including insulation, fenestration and thermal barriers.

CLINIC, OUTPATIENT. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical care on less than a 24-hour basis to persons who are not rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided.

Outpatient clinics generally consist of doctors' offices where various medical services can be provided. These clinics typically function during normal business hours (i.e., less than 24 hours) and, unlike ambulatory care facilities, the care recipients are generally ambulatory and capable of self-preservation. This definition clarifies the difference between ambulatory surgery centers (ambulatory care facilities) and the typical doctor's office. In many cities, outpatient clinics are open at all hours to be available to people who work a variety of shifts. The term "urgent care" is often used to describe such facilities. An outpatient facility that is open 24/7 may still be classified as a Group B occupancy, provided that all care recipients are outpatients and individual care recipients are not treated for periods in excess of 24 hours. The latter would describe a Group I-2 hospital (see commentary, Sections 407 and 422).

CLOSED SYSTEM. The use of a solid or liquid hazardous material involving a closed vessel or system that remains closed during normal operations where vapors emitted by the product are not liberated outside of the vessel or system and the product is not exposed to the atmosphere during normal operations; and all uses of compressed gases. Examples of closed systems for solids and liquids include product conveyed through a piping system into a closed vessel, system or piece of equipment.

The difference between a closed system and an open system is whether the hazardous material involved in the process is exposed to the atmosphere. While not specific in the definition, certain gases are also allowed in closed systems, as indicated in Tables 307.7(1) and 307.7(2). Materials in closed or open systems are assumed to be “in use” as opposed to “in storage.” Gases are always assumed to be in closed systems, since they would be immediately dispersed in an open system if exposed to the atmosphere without some means of containment (see the definition of “Open system”).

COASTAL A ZONE. Area within a special flood hazard area, landward of a V zone or landward of an open coast without mapped coastal high-hazard areas. In a coastal A zone, the principal source of flooding must be astronomical tides, storm surges, seiches or tsunamis, not riverine flooding. During the base flood conditions, the potential for breaking wave height shall be greater than or equal to 450 mm. The inland limit of the coastal A zone is (a) the Limit of Moderate Wave Action if delineated on a FIRM, or (b) designated by the building official.

For years, post-disaster investigations have identified wave-related damage in flood zones other than coastal high-hazard areas, especially in flood hazard areas that are immediately inland of coastal high-hazard areas (Zone V). Where a Coastal A Zone is shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map by the delineation of the inland extent of the 450 mm wave (Limit of Moderate Wave Action [LiMWA]), or where a community designates such a zone by other means (such as a certain distance inland of the Zone V boundary), then ASCE 24 (referenced standard), requires buildings and structures in Coastal A Zones to be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements for coastal high-hazard areas.

COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA. Area within the special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary dune along an open coast and any other area that is subject to high-velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources.

Some coastal and lake shorelines experience flooding that includes wind-driven waves. The presence of waves and the potential for local scour must be taken into consideration when determining flood loads.

COLLAR JOINT. Vertical longitudinal space between wythes of masonry or between masonry wythe and backup construction that is permitted to be filled with mortar or grout.

A collar joint is a filled space between masonry wythes [see Commentary Figure 202(8)]. Care is necessary for proper construction of collar joints; particularly where solid filling is required.

COLLECTOR. A horizontal diaphragm element parallel and in line with the applied force that collects and transfers diaphragm shear forces to the

===== Page 0088 =====
vertical elements of the lateral force-resisting system or distributes forces within the diaphragm, or both.

The collector is an element of the diaphragm that transfers the diaphragm shear from the point of application into the adjoining vertical lateral force-resisting elements, usually the shear walls.

COMBINATION FIRE/SMOKE DAMPER. A listed device installed in ducts and air transfer openings designed to close automatically upon the detection of heat and resist the passage of flame and smoke. The device is installed to operate automatically, controlled by a smoke detection system, and where required, is capable of being positioned from a fire command center.

A combination damper is used where the code requires not only a fire damper but also a smoke damper designed to limit the passage of smoke from one side of fire-resistance-rated construction to the other. Fire and smoke dampers are required at duct penetrations of shafts in accordance with Section 717.5.3. Both fire and smoke dampers are required at duct and air transfer openings in fire walls utilized as horizontal exits in accordance with Section 717.5.1.1. Subject to the exceptions listed, both shall also be required at duct penetrations of fire barrier walls utilized as horizontal exits in accordance with Section 717.5.2.1. The combination fire/smoke damper must be actuated automatically by a smoke detection system. Where the damper is part of a smoke control system in Section 909, it shall also be controlled from the fire command center.

COMBINED PILE RAFT. A geotechnical composite construction that combines the bearing effect of both foundation elements, raft and piles, by taking into account interactions between the foundation elements and the subsoil.

Normally, the soil beneath a pile cap is not considered to be carrying any load. This is not the case with combined pile rafts, which therefore are considered differently under SBC 303.

COMBUSTIBLE DUST. Finely divided solid material that is 420 microns or less in diameter and which, when dispersed in air in the proper proportions, could be ignited by a flame, spark or other source of ignition. Combustible dust will pass through a U.S. No. 40 standard sieve.

Combustible dusts are combustible solids in a finely divided state that are suspended in the air. An explosion hazard exists when the concentration of the combustible dust is within the explosive limits and exposed to an ignition source of sufficient energy and duration to initiate self-sustained combustion. A review of the occupancy classification for Group H-2 in Section 307.4 indicates that combustible dusts are classified in that occupancy group. To apply this portion of Section 307.4, a determination of the deflagration hazard of the manufactured, generated or used combustible dust is required. This is typically determined by an engineering analysis based on the combustible dust dispersion and proportion. Where the analysis determines that this dispersion and proportion of combustible dust can be ignited by an ignition source, then an occupancy classification of Group H-2 would be appropriate. Combustible dust that, as a material, does not rise to the defined level of hazard in a particular building, would not cause the building or portion thereof housing the hazard to be classified in Group H-2, but rather in the occupancy group that is most appropriate for the particular operation.

The original tabular maximum allowable quantity (MAQ) per control area for combustible dust included in the legacy building and fire codes was deleted because of its questionable value given the complexities of dust explosion hazards. The note reinforces the fact that determining a theoretical maximum allowable quantity of combustible dust and the potential for a dust explosion requires a thorough evaluation and technical report based on the provisions of Section 414.1.3. Such determination is complex and requires evaluation far beyond the simple 16 g/m \( ^{3} \)  maximum allowable quantity previously used by the legacy codes. Critical factors, such as particle size, material density, humidity and oxygen concentration, play a major role in the evaluation of the dust hazard and are much too complex to be simply addressed.

COMBUSTIBLE FIBERS. Readily ignitable and free burning materials in a fibrous or shredded form, such as cocoa fiber, cloth, cotton, excelsior, hay, hemp, hencequen, iste, jute, kapok, oakum, rags, sisal, Spanish moss, straw, tow, wastepaper, certain synthetic fibers or other like materials. This definition does not include densely packed baled cotton.

Operations involving combustible fibers are typically associated with paper milling, recycling, cloth manufacturing, carpet and textile mills and agricultural operations, among others. The primary hazards associated with such operations involve the abundance of materials and their ready ignitability. Many organic fibers are prone to spontaneous ignition if improperly dried and kept in areas without sufficient ventilation.

===== Page 0089 =====
The basic component of all textiles is fiber. Fibers may be either natural or man-made. Cellulosic, protein and mineral fibers are considered natural fibers. Fibers produced by chemical processes (nylon, rayon, Orlon, etc.) are considered man-made. The definition clarifies that densely packed baled cotton is not to be considered a hazardous material. The density and packaging arrangements of cotton fibers meeting the definition of "Baled cotton, densely packed" in this section reduce the hazard of the material such that the hazardous materials provisions of the code need no longer apply.

COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID. A liquid having a closed cup flash point at or above  \( 38^{\circ} \) C. Combustible liquids shall be subdivided as follows: The category of combustible liquids does not include compressed gases or cryogenic fluids or liquids that do not have a fire point when tested in accordance with ASTM D92.

Class II. Liquids having a closed cup flash point at or above  \( 38^{\circ} \) C and below  \( 60^{\circ} \) C.

Class IIIA. Liquids having a closed cup flash point at or above  \( 60^{\circ} \) C and below  \( 93^{\circ} \) C.

Class IIIB. Liquids having a closed cup flash point at or above  \( 93^{\circ} \) C.

Combustible liquids differ from flammable liquids in that the closed cup flash point of all combustible liquids is at or above  \( 38^{\circ} \) C (see the definition of "Flash point"). The three classes of combustible liquids are dictated by the range of their closed cup flash point. The flash point range of  \( 38^{\circ} \) C to  \( 60^{\circ} \) C for Class II liquids is based on a possible indoor ambient temperature exceeding  \( 38^{\circ} \) C. Only a moderate degree of heating would be required to bring the liquid to its flash point in this type of condition. Class III liquids, which have flash points higher than  \( 60^{\circ} \) C, would require a significant heat source besides ambient temperature conditions to reach their flash point (see the definition of "Flammable liquid"). Class IIIA has a closed cup flash point range of  \( 60^{\circ} \) C. Class IIIB has a closed cup flash point at or above  \( 93^{\circ} \) C. Combustible liquids are primarily considered Group H-2 materials. Class II and IIIA liquids are considered Group H-3 where used or stored in normally closed containers or systems pressurized at less than 103.5 kPa. Motor oil is a typical example of a Class IIIB combustible liquid. Note that Class IIIB liquids are not regulated to be classified as Group H per Table 307.1(1). While cryogenic fluids and compressed gases may be combustible, they are to be regulated separately from combustible liquids.

COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle used to transport passengers or property where the motor vehicle meets one of the following:
1 Has a gross vehicle weight rating of 4550 kg or more.

2 Is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver.

This definition provides the necessary clarification as to what constitutes a "commercial vehicle." These criteria are from the DOT regulations 49 CFR 390.5 and correlate with Section 1607.7. Where vehicles of this size are present in buildings greater than 450 m² in area, the code requires an automatic sprinkler system be provided in repair garages, in commercial parking garages and in Group S-1 storage occupancies (see Section 903.2).

COMMON PATH OF EGRESS TRAVEL. That portion of exit access travel distance measured from the most remote point of each room, area or space to that point where the occupants have separate and distinct access to two exits or exit access doorways.

The common path of egress travel is a concept used to refine travel distance criteria. A common path of travel is the route an occupant will travel where the one way in is also the one way out, similar to a dead-end corridor or single-exit suite. Once occupants reach a point where two different routes continue to two separate exits, then common path of travel is finished. The length of a common path of egress travel is limited so that the means of egress path of travel provides a choice before the occupant has travelled an excessive distance (see Section 1006). This reduces the possibility that, although the exits are remote from one another, a single fire condition will render both paths unavailable. The common path of egress travel is part of the overall exit access travel distance. To be compliant, the path of egress must meet criteria for both common path of egress travel and exit access travel distance.

COMMON USE. Interior or exterior circulation paths, rooms, spaces or elements that are not for public use and are made available for the shared use of two or more people.

Some buildings include areas that are restricted to employees only or where public access is limited. Common-use spaces may be part of employee work areas but do not include public-use spaces. Any space that is shared by two or more persons, such as copy areas, break rooms, toilet rooms or circulation paths, are common use areas. A grade school classroom would be another example of a common use space (see also the commentaries for the definitions of "Public-use areas" and "Employee work area").

COMPRESSED GAS. A material or mixture of

===== Page 0090 =====
materials that meets both of the following:

1 Is a gas at  \( 20^{\circ} \) C or less at atmosphere 101.3 kPa of pressure.

2 Has a boiling point of  \( 20^{\circ} \) C or less at 101.3 kPa which is either liquefied, nonliquefied or in solution, except those gases which have no other health- or physical-hazard properties are not considered to be compressed until the pressure in the packaging exceeds 280 kPa at  \( 20^{\circ} \) C.

The states of a compressed gas are categorized as follows:

1 Nonliquefied compressed gases are gases, other than those in solution, which are in a packaging under the charged pressure and are entirely gaseous at a temperature of  \( 20^{\circ} \) C.

2 Liquefied compressed gases are gases that, in a packaging under the charged pressure, are partially liquid at a temperature of  \( 20^{\circ} \) C.

3 Compressed gases in solution are nonliquefied gases that are dissolved in a solvent.

4 Compressed gas mixtures consist of a mixture of two or more compressed gases contained in a packaging, the hazard properties of which are represented by the properties of the mixture as a whole.

This term refers to all types of gases that are under pressure at normal room or outdoor temperatures inside their containers, including, but not limited to, flammable, nonflammable, highly toxic, toxic, cryogenic and liquefied gases. The vapor pressure limitations provide the distinction between a liquid and a gas. Gases are materials that boil at a temperature of  \( 20^{\circ} \) C or less at a pressure of 101.3 kPa. Liquefied and nonliquefied compressed gases are determined by the state of the gas at a temperature of  \( 20^{\circ} \) C. Nonliquefied gases are entirely gaseous, while liquefied gases are partially liquid.

## CONCRETE.

CARBONATE AGGREGATE. Concrete made with aggregates consisting mainly of calcium or magnesium carbonate, such as limestone or dolomite, and containing 40 percent or less quartz, chert or flint.

Concrete made with this type of aggregate is listed in Table 721.1(1) and Table 721.1(2) (Item 4) with prescriptive details regarding concrete fire-resistance ratings. This type of aggregate is also indicated for concrete assemblies that require calculations to determine the fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section 722.2.1 (i.e., Section 722.2.1.1) and Table 721.1(3) with prescriptive details regarding concrete fire-resistance ratings. This type of aggregate is also indicated for concrete assemblies that require calculations to determine the fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section 722.2.1.1 (i.e., Section 722.2.1.1.2).

CELLULAR. A lightweight insulating concrete made by mixing a preformed foam with Portland cement slurry and having a dry unit weight of approximately 480 kg per m \( ^{3} \) .

Concrete made with this type of aggregate is listed in Table 721.1(3) with prescriptive details regarding concrete fire-resistance ratings. This type of aggregate is also indicated for concrete assemblies that require calculations to determine the fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section 722.2.1 [i.e., Table 722.2.1.2(1), Note a]. Concrete with this aggregate provides a higher fire resistance than others.

LIGHTWEIGHT AGGREGATE. Concrete made with aggregates of expanded clay, shale, slag or slate or sintered fly ash or any natural lightweight aggregate meeting ASTM C330 and possessing equivalent fire-resistance properties and weighing 1360 to 1840 kg per m \( ^{3} \) .

Concrete made with this type of aggregate is listed in Table 721.1(1), Table 721.1(2) and Table 721.1(3) with prescriptive details regarding concrete fire-resistance ratings. This type of aggregate is also indicated for concrete assemblies that require calculations to determine the fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section 722.2.1 (i.e., Table 722.2.1.1). Concrete made with this type of aggregate provides a higher fire resistance than others.

PERLITE. A lightweight insulating concrete having a dry unit weight of approximately 480 kg per m \( ^{3} \)  made with perlite concrete aggregate. Perlite aggregate is produced from a volcanic rock which, when heated, expands to form a glass-like material of cellular structure.

Concrete made with this type of aggregate is listed in Tables 721.1(1), 721.1(2) and 721.1(3) with prescriptive details regarding concrete fire-resistance ratings. This type of aggregate is also indicated for concrete assemblies that require calculations to determine the fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section 722.2.1 (i.e., Section 722.2.1.1.2). Concrete made with this aggregate provides a higher fire resistance than others.

SAND-LIGHTWEIGHT. Concrete made with a combination of expanded clay, shale, slag, slate, sintered fly ash, or any natural lightweight aggregate meeting ASTM C330 and possessing equivalent fire-resistance properties and natural sand. Its unit weight is generally between 1680 and 1920 kg per m \( ^{3} \) .

===== Page 0091 =====
Concrete made with this type of aggregate is listed in Table 721.1(1), Table 721.1(2) and Table 721.1(3) with prescriptive details regarding concrete fire-resistance ratings. This type of aggregate is also indicated for concrete assemblies that require calculations to determine the fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section 722.2.1 (i.e., Table 722.2.1.1) (also see Section 702.1). Concrete with this aggregate provides an average fire resistance compared to others.

SILICEOUS AGGREGATE. Concrete made with normal-weight aggregates consisting mainly of silica or compounds other than calcium or magnesium carbonate, which contains more than 40-percent quartz, chert or flint.

Concrete made with this type of aggregate is listed in Tables 721.1(1), 721.1(2) and 721.1(3) with prescriptive details regarding concrete fire-resistance ratings. This type of aggregate is also indicated for concrete assemblies that require calculations to determine the fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section 722.2.1 (i.e., Table 722.2.1.1). Concrete with this aggregate provides the lowest fire resistance.

VERMICULITE. A light weight insulating concrete made with vermiculite concrete aggregate which is laminated micaceous material produced by expanding the ore at high temperatures. When added to a Portland cement slurry the resulting concrete has a dry unit weight of approximately 480 kg per m \( ^{3} \) .

Concrete made with this type of aggregate is listed in Tables 721.1(1), 721.1(2) and 720.1(3) with prescriptive details regarding concrete fire-resistance ratings. This type of aggregate is also indicated for concrete assemblies that require calculations to determine the fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section 722.2.1 [i.e., Table 722.2.1.2(1), Note a]. Concrete with this aggregate provides a higher fire resistance than others.

CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part thereof that contains sleeping units where residents share bathroom or kitchen facilities, or both.

Concrete living facilities are those pertaining to group housing (e.g., dormitories) that combine individual sleeping quarters with communal facilities for food, care, sanitation and recreation. The number of occupants in the facility determines the appropriate occupancy classification. There are two thresholds: 10 and 16. A concrete living facility with 16 or fewer nontransient residents falls in the R-3 classification. For more than 16 nontransient residents, the classification is R-2. For transient residents, where there are 10 or fewer in the facility, it is also in the R-3 classification. Where more than 10 transient residents, it is an R-1 occupancy. See also the commentary for the definition of "Sleeping unit."

CONSTANTLY ATTENDED LOCATION. A designated location at a facility staffed by trained personnel on a continuous basis where alarm or supervisory signals are monitored, and facilities are provided for notification of the fire department or other emergency services.

These locations are intended to receive trouble, supervisory and fire alarm signals transmitted by the fire protection equipment installed in a protected facility. Chapter 9 is intended to have both an approved location and personnel who are acceptable to the building official responsible for actions taken when the fire protection system requires attention. The term “constantly attended” implies 24-hour surveillance of the system, at the designated location.

CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS. Written, graphic and pictorial documents prepared or assembled for describing the design, location and physical characteristics of the elements of a project necessary for obtaining a building permit.

To determine whether proposed construction is in compliance with code requirements, it is necessary that sufficient information be submitted to the building official for review. This typically consists of drawings (such as floor plans, elevations, sections and details), specifications and product information describing the proposed work.

CONSTRUCTION TYPES. See Section 602.

Type I. See Section 602.2.

Type II. See Section 602.2.

Type III. See Section 602.3.

Type IV. See Section 602.4.

Type V. See Section 602.5.

Construction types are “defined” by the materials and fire-resistance rating of the construction as specified by the provisions in Chapter 6.

CONTINUOUS INSULATION (ci). Insulating material that is continuous across all structural members without thermal bridges other than fasteners and service openings. It is installed on the exterior or exterior or is integral to any opaque surface of the building envelope.

The need for more insulation in or on exterior walls has created the need to specify continuous insulation, thus the need for this definition. The insulation location, with respect to the exterior wall, can vary as long as the insulation is continuous without thermal bridging.

CONTROL AREA. Spaces within a building

===== Page 0092 =====
where quantities of hazardous materials not exceeding the maximum allowable quantities per control area are stored, dispensed, used or handled. See the definition of "Outdoor control area" in SBC 801.

Control areas provide an alternative method for the use and storage of hazardous materials without classifying the building or structure as a high-hazard occupancy (Group H). This concept is based on regulating the allowable quantities of hazardous materials per control area, rather than per building area, by giving credit for further compartmentation through the use of fire barriers and horizontal assemblies having a minimum fire-resistance rating of not less than 1 hour. The maximum quantities of hazardous materials within a given control area cannot exceed the amounts for a given material listed in either Table 307.1(1) or Table 307.1(2) (see commentary, Section 414.2). Control areas are not limited to within buildings. A storage area that is exposed to the elements (wind, rain, etc.) also cannot exceed the maximum allowable quantity.

## CONTROLLED LOW-STRENGTH

MATERIAL. A self-compacted, cementitious material used primarily as a backfill in place of compacted fill.

The definition provided is from ACI 229R. This type of material is known by many "local" names (e.g., flowable fill) and is commonly used instead of a compacted backfill. Requirements for its use under the code are outlined in SBC 303.

## CONVENTIONAL LIGHT-FRAME

CONSTRUCTION. Construction whose primary structural elements are formed by a system of repetitive wood-framing members. See Section 2308 for conventional light-frame construction provisions.

Conventional light-frame construction is one of the three methods for designing wood buildings or structures that is recognized in Chapter 23. Section 2308 provides prescriptive provisions and specifications for this method. Since it is a prescriptive approach, conventional construction is necessarily limited in applicability.

CORNICE. A projecting horizontal molded element located at or near the top of an architectural feature.

This definition facilitates the applicability of roof loads that are listed in Table 1607.1.

CORRIDOR. An enclosed exit access component that defines and provides a path of egress travel.

Corridors are regulated in the code because they serve as principal elements of travel in many means of egress systems within buildings. Typically, corridors have walls that extend from the floor to the ceiling. They need not extend above the ceiling or have doors in their openings unless a fire-resistance rating is required (see Section 1020).

While both aisles and corridors may result in a confined path of travel, an aisle is an unenclosed or partially closed component, while a corridor would be an enclosed component of the means of egress. The enclosed character of the corridor restricts the sensory perception of the user. A fire located on the other side of the corridor wall, for example, may not be as readily seen, heard or smelled by the occupants traveling through the egress corridor. The code does not specifically state what is considered "enclosed" where corridors are not fire-resistance rated. Where an egress path is bounded by partial-height walls, such as workstation partitions in an office, issues would be if the walls provided a confined path of travel and limited fire recognition in adjacent spaces by restricting line of sight, hearing and smell.

CORRIDOR, OPEN-ENDED. See “Open-ended corridor.”

CORRIDOR DAMPER. A listed device intended for use where air ducts penetrate or terminate at horizontal openings in the ceilings of fire-resistance-rated corridors, where the corridor ceiling is permitted to be constructed as required for the corridor walls.

Under certain conditions, the code allows the corridor enclosure to include a ceiling constructed as a fire-rated assembly equivalent to that required for the corridor walls (fire partitions). Under most conditions, this would allow the fire partitions to be continuous only to the fire-rated ceiling assembly, rather than to the structure above. Where ducts penetrate through or terminate at these ceiling assemblies, a corridor damper is required. Corridor damper requirements are included in Section 717.5.4.1.

CORROSION RESISTANCE. The ability of a material to withstand deterioration of its surface or its properties when exposed to its environment.

There are different environments to which building construction materials are exposed. "Corrosion resistance" is not an absolute term; it is relative to the building material and where it is being used. For instance, some plastic polymers might resist corrosion where used in an exterior environment but might not be resistant to corrosion from certain chemical gases that could be present in a laboratory.

CORROSIVE. A chemical that causes visible destruction of, or irreversible alterations in, living tissue by chemical action at the point of contact. A

===== Page 0093 =====
chemical shall be considered corrosive if, when tested on the intact skin of albino rabbits by the method described in DOTn 49 CFR, Part 173.137, such chemical destroys or changes irreversibly the structure of the tissue at the point of contact following an exposure period of 4 hours. This term does not refer to action on inanimate surfaces.

This definition is derived from DOL 29 CFR, Part 1910.1200. While corrosive materials do not present a fire, explosion or reactivity hazard, they do pose a handling and storage problem. Corrosive materials, therefore, are primarily considered a health hazard and are classified as Group H-4 material. Many corrosive chemicals are also strong oxidizing agents that require classification as a multiple hazard in accordance with Section 307.8.

COURT. An open, uncovered space, unobstructed to the sky, bounded on three or more sides by exterior building walls or other enclosing devices.

Though not specifically identified in the definition, the provisions in the code for courts (see Section 1205) are only applicable to those areas created by the arrangement of exterior walls and used to provide natural light or ventilation (see Section 1205.1 and the definition of "Yard." See also the definition of "Egress court" for courts that are utilized for exit discharge.).

COVERED MALL BUILDING. A single building enclosing a number of tenants and occupants, such as retail stores, drinking and dining establishments, entertainment and amusement facilities, passenger transportation terminals, offices and other similar uses wherein two or more tenants have a main entrance into one or more malls. Anchor buildings shall not be considered as a part of the covered mall building. The term "covered mall building" shall include open mall buildings as defined below.

A covered mall building is the entire area of the building (area of mall plus gross leasable area), excluding the anchor buildings. Passenger transportation terminals frequently are developed as wide concourses with small shops along the sides. For this reason, passenger transportation facilities are included. Transportation facilities used for freight or other purposes are not to be considered a covered mall building [see Commentary Figure 202(2)]. The term "covered mall building" also includes open mall buildings. Unless noted otherwise, open mall buildings shall comply with all the provisions for a covered mall building.

MALL. A roofed or covered common pedestrian area within a covered mall building that serves as access for two or more tenants and not to exceed three levels that are open to each other. The term "mall" shall include open malls as defined below.

A mall is an interior, climate-controlled pedestrian way that is open to the tenant spaces within the mall building and typically connects to the anchor buildings. The term "mall" shall also include open malls. Unless noted otherwise, open malls must comply with all the provisions for malls.

OPEN MALL. An unroofed common pedestrian way serving a number of tenants not exceeding three levels. Circulation at levels above grade shall be permitted to include open exterior balconies leading to exits discharging at grade.

An open mall is an uncovered common pedestrian walk that is open to the sky above and to tenant spaces within the open mall building, and typically connects to anchor buildings. The size of the openings to the sky is in accordance with Section 402.4.3. Unless noted otherwise, open malls must comply with all the provisions for malls.

OPEN MALL BUILDING. Several structures housing a number of tenants, such as retail stores, drinking and dining establishments, entertainment and amusement facilities, offices, and other similar uses, wherein two or more tenants have a main entrance into one or more open malls. Anchor buildings are not considered as a part of the open mall building.

An open mall building includes all buildings housing a number of tenants wherein two or more tenants have a main entrance into one or more open malls. The code requires the establishment of a perimeter line to help the building official and the facility owner to be in agreement as to what is within the open mall building.

Because the open mall is characterized by there not being a roof connecting one side of the pedestrian mall to the other, the covered mall “building” may actually be a collection of separate buildings that all rely on a shared pedestrian concourse for egress. Similar to a covered mall building, an open mall “building” does not include anchor buildings. Unless noted otherwise, open mall buildings have to comply with all the provisions for covered mall buildings.

CRIPPLE WALL. A framed stud wall extending from the top of the foundation to the underside of floor framing for the lowest occupied floor level.

Cripple walls are built on the top of footings or foundation walls. They can typically be found along the top of stepped foundation walls where the grade adjoining the structure changes height. Cripple walls must be properly

===== Page 0094 =====
braced to resist lateral forces. They are often treated the same as a first-story wall.

CRITICAL CIRCUIT. A circuit that requires continuous operation to ensure safety of the structure and occupants.

The purpose of this definition is to clarify the applicability of the provisions of Section 2702.3. Critical circuits are those electrical circuits supplying power to systems and equipment that are vital to the safety of building occupants and to the operational continuity of safety systems such as fire alarm systems, security systems, emergency communication systems and similar systems identified throughout the code, most notably in sections pertaining to emergency power. Although the term “critical circuit” is used widely throughout many industry standards, there is no specific definition for the term. As such, this definition was created based on definitions found in NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401) and is similar to the definition of “Critical Operations Power Systems (COPS)” in that standard. See the commentary to Section 2702.3.

CROSS-LAMINATED TIMBER. A prefabricated engineered wood product consisting of not less than three layers of solid-sawn lumber or structural composite lumber where the adjacent layers are cross oriented and bonded with structural adhesive to form a solid wood element.

This definition enables the code user to correctly apply the material standards in Section 2303 for these wood products.

CRYOGENIC FLUID. A liquid having a boiling point lower than  \( -101^{\circ} \) C at an absolute pressure of 101.3 kPa.

Cryogenic fluids present a hazard because they are extremely cold. Should a spill occur, their extremely cold temperature affects other compounds exposed to the spilled cryogenic fluid. Cryogenic fluids may be flammable or nonflammable. However, nonflammable cryogenics may possess properties that cause them to support combustion or react severely with other materials. The code is only intended to classify flammable or oxidizing cryogenic fluids as a hazardous material.

CUSTODIAL CARE. Assistance with day-to-day living tasks, such as assistance with cooking, taking medication, bathing, using toilet facilities and other tasks of daily living. Custodial care includes persons receiving care who have the ability to respond to emergency situations and evacuate at a slower rate and/or who have mental and psychiatric complications.

Care facilities are used by care recipients of varying acuity seeking a broad spectrum of available support services. These facilities span a wide range of occupancy types, including Groups E, I and R. There are three types of care defined in the codes: personal, custodial and medical.

Personal care is on one end of the care spectrum. It occurs in Group E for child daycare services for persons over 2½ years of age. Occupants are supervised but do not need custodial or medical care.

Custodial care occurs in Groups I-1, I-4 and R-4, where occupants may be elderly or impaired, or require adult or child daycare of any age. Care recipients may need daily assistance with cooking, cleaning, bathing or taking medications. Persons who receive custodial care may or may not require assistance with evacuation depending on the occupancy and/or the "condition" in the occupancy. See also the commentaries to Sections 308.2 and 310.5 for Group I-1/R-4 and Section 308.5 for Group I-4.

Medical care occurs in Group I-2 on the opposite end of the spectrum, where care recipients are incapable of self-preservation. They may be completely bedridden, meaning bed movement may be required during emergencies, and may be dependent on life support systems such as medical gases and emergency power to maintain life. This level of acuity is not allowed in custodial care or personal care.

There are three main defining aspects of custodial care that further differentiate it from medical care. The first is the evacuation capability of custodial care recipients. Groups I-1, Condition 1 and R-4, Condition.

1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1. 1

===== Page 0095 =====
preservation," "Medical care," "Nursing homes," and "Personal care service."

DALLE GLASS. A decorative composite glazing material made of individual pieces of glass that are embedded in a cast matrix of concrete or epoxy.

Dalle glass is a form of "stained" or "decorative" glass, and is more commonly known as "faceted" glass. Dalle glass is an outdated term and is rarely used. It can be prefabricated in panels that are set into framed openings, or it can be constructed in place, similar to the way a mason would construct a single-wythe masonry wall. The actual glazing can be heavy pieces of flat or textured glass, irregularly shaped chunks of glass, glass shapes or translucent minerals cut to form geometric patterns or artistic scenes. Knowing that Dalle glass, or faceted glass, is a type of decorative glass is necessary because decorative glass is not required to be safety glazed in hazardous locations specified in Section 2406.4 (see Sections 2406.4.1, 2406.4.2 and 2406.4.3 for specific exceptions).

DAMPER. See “Ceiling radiation damper,” “Combination fire/smoke damper,” “Corridor damper,” “Fire damper” and “Smoke damper.”

Dampers are used primarily in heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) duct systems that pass through fire-resistance-rated walls, floors and ceilings. Dampers may also be required in rated walls independent of HVAC duct systems. Dampers are provided to maintain the fire-resistance rating of the penetrated assembly, to provide a barrier to resist smoke migration, or both. Damper types include fire dampers, smoke dampers, combination fire/smoke dampers, ceiling radiation dampers and corridor dampers.

DANGEROUS. Any building, structure or portion thereof that meets any of the conditions described below shall be deemed dangerous:

1 The building or structure has collapsed, has partially collapsed, has moved off its foundation or lacks the necessary support of the ground.

2 There exists a significant risk of collapse, detachment or dislodgment of any portion, member, appurtenance or ornamentation of the building or structure under permanent, routine, or frequent loads; under actual loads already in effect; or under wind, rain, earthquake, or other environmental loads when such loads are imminent.

This definition describes two conditions that are considered to be dangerous in buildings in regard to support, loading and the ability of the structure to resist loads.

DAY BOX. A portable magazine designed to hold explosive materials constructed in accordance with the requirements for a Type 3 magazine as defined and classified in Chapter 56 of SBC 801.

A day box is an explosive magazine that is listed in Note e of Table 307.1(1). Where used, a day box will allow an increase in the maximum allowable quantities of hazardous materials.

DEAD LOAD. The weight of materials of construction incorporated into the building, including but not limited to walls, floors, roofs, ceilings, stairways, built-in partitions, finishes, cladding and other similarly incorporated architectural and structural items, and the weight of fixed service equipment, including cranes and material handling systems.

This definition identifies the type of items that must be accounted for (also see Sections 1606.5 and 1607.14.2.2 for inclusion of items on vegetative and landscaped roofs). This definition is necessary to distinguish dead loads from other loads, and for use in load combinations as specified by Section 1605. Dead loads are considered permanent in the load combinations. The nominal dead load is to be determined in accordance with Section 1606.

The weights of service equipment, such as cranes, material handling systems and similar fixed equipment, are to be included in the dead load. For the most part, tracking the weights of each utility system is not practical and the structural design is therefore based on a dead load allowance for these items. At times, the actual weight of equipment to be installed is unknown during the design phase of a building because the supplier of the equipment has yet to be determined. The structural design must often proceed based on an estimated equipment dead load. For additional comments on dead load estimates, see the commentary to Section 1606.2.

DECORATIVE GLASS. A carved, leaded or Dalle glass or glazing material whose purpose is decorative or artistic, not functional; whose coloring, texture or other design qualities or components cannot be removed without destroying the glazing material and whose surface, or assembly into which it is incorporated, is divided into segments.

This definition is needed to understand and properly apply exceptions to the requirements for safety glazing. Decorative glass is excluded at specific hazardous locations, and thus is not required to be safety glazing (see Sections 2406.4.1, 2406.4.2 and 2406.4.3).

DECORATIVE MATERIALS. All materials applied over the building interior finish for

===== Page 0096 =====
decorative, acoustical or other effect including, but not limited to, curtains, draperies, fabrics and streamers; and all other materials utilized for decorative effect including, but not limited to, bulletin boards, artwork, posters, photographs, batting, cloth, cotton, hay, stalks, straw, vines, leaves, trees, moss and similar items, foam plastics and materials containing foam plastics. Decorative materials do not include wall coverings, ceiling coverings, floor coverings, ordinary window shades, interior finish and materials 0.65 mm or less in thickness applied directly to and adhering tightly to a substrate.

Decorative materials have historically been characterized by easily ignitable materials that burn very rapidly and contribute to fire spread. In order to properly classify decorative materials, it is important to define the term and this definition captures the essential elements. The significance of this definition is that it details items that are not regulated as decorative materials in the application of code requirements. While any dictionary would define floor coverings, window shades and wallpaper as being “decorative” in a building interior, they are not considered decorative materials subject to code-required flame-resistance testing.

DEEP FOUNDATION. A deep foundation is a foundation element that does not satisfy the definition of a shallow foundation.

SBC 303 identifies two major classifications for foundations: shallow or deep. This definition clarifies that foundations not meeting the definition of "Shallow foundation" are, by default, considered to be deep foundations.

DEFEND-IN-PLACE. A method of emergency response that engages building components and trained staff to provide occupant safety during an emergency. Emergency response involves remaining in place, relocating within the building, or both, without evacuating the building.

Nursing homes, hospitals and separated ambulatory care facilities may use defend-in-place methods as part of their strategy to deal with some emergency situations. Reasons why this may be a necessary option include situations such as a surgery or other procedure in process, emergency life monitoring/support equipment needed, or weather outside that could be hazardous to patient health. Defend-in-place, or protect-in-place, is a concept that has long been employed as the preferred method of fire response in nursing homes and hospitals due to the fragile nature of the occupants. Occupants in these settings are often dependent on the building infrastructure (e.g., medical gases, life support), and immediate evacuation would place their lives at risk.

These types of facilities are subdivided into different smoke compartments with refuge areas that can accommodate all building occupants. SBC 801 requires all staff to have training on the fire and safety evacuation plans and practice drills. The idea is for staff to move care recipients and guests to areas that are away from the area where there may be smoke, flames or other safety hazards, but not necessarily outside of the building. Typically, movement is into an adjacent smoke compartment. Care recipients or guests already in the smoke compartments away from the hazard are defended in place. Many hospital systems are on emergency or standby power to keep patient care in operation during an emergency.

These types of facilities will also have full evacuation plans for other types of emergencies, such as floods. See SBC 801 for specific requirements for fire and safety evacuation plans. These plans must be developed and reviewed with the fire department.

DEFERRED SUBMITTAL. Those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period.

Submit documents are required at the time of permit application (See Section 107). Where a building is “fast-track” or is a shell building, a complete set of construction documents for the building may not be available at the time of the initial permit application. So that a complete set of documents is available for the building department review and records, some of the construction drawings may be provided at a later time. A list of pending documents, specifying when they will be provided, must be included in the initial submittal and approved by the building official.

DEFLAGRATION. An exothermic reaction, such as the extremely rapid oxidation of a flammable dust or vapor in air, in which the reaction progresses through the unburned material at a rate less than the velocity of sound. A deflagration can have an explosive effect.

Materials that present a deflagration hazard usually burn very rapidly with the release of energy from a chemical reaction in the form of intense heat. Confined deflagration hazards under pressure can result in an explosion. Most hazardous materials that pose a severe deflagration hazard are classified as Group H-2 in accordance with Section 307.4 (see the definition of "Detonation").

DELAYED-ACTION CLOSER. A self-closing

===== Page 0097 =====
device that incorporates a delay prior to the initiation of closing. Delayed-action closers are mechanical devices with an adjustable delay.

This definition describes a mechanism for self-closing doors that are typically in a closed position, such as school classroom doors, where delayed closing could be beneficial. These types of closers are not permitted where the automatic closing of doors is required.

DELUGE SYSTEM. A sprinkler system employing open sprinklers attached to a piping system connected to a water supply through a valve that is opened by the operation of a detection system installed in the same areas as the sprinklers. When this valve opens, water flows into the piping system and discharges from all sprinklers attached thereto.

A deluge system applies large quantities of water or foam throughout the protected area by means of a system of open sprinklers. In a fire, the system is activated by a fire detection system that makes it possible to apply water to a fire more quickly and to cover a larger area than with a conventional automatic sprinkler system, which depends on sprinklers being activated individually as the fire spreads. As the definition indicates, the sprinklers are open. There is no fusible link, so when water is admitted into the system by the fire detection system, it flows through the piping and is immediately discharged through the sprinkler heads. Deluge systems are particularly beneficial in hazardous areas where the fuel loads (combustible contents) are of such a nature that fire may grow with exceptional rapidity and possibly flash ahead of the operations of conventional automatic sprinklers.

## DESIGN EARTHQUAKE GROUND

MOTION. The earthquake ground motion that buildings and structures are specifically

A structure must be designed for the level of ground motion corresponding to the design earthquake. This is determined in Section 1613.2.4 as two-thirds of the maximum earthquake ground motions with adjustments to account for the site's soil profile.

DESIGN FLOOD. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas:

1 Area with a flood plain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year.

2 Area designated as a flood hazard area on a community’s flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.

The design flood is either the base flood or another flood based on other criteria. Government may choose to prepare and adopt flood hazard maps that show flood hazard areas that are not on maps. For example, some communities elect to prepare flood hazard maps based on the assumption that the upland watershed is built out to existing zoning, often called “ultimate development,” and sometimes the “flood of record” is the basis for regulation.

DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation of the “design flood,” including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community’s legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building’s perimeter plus the depth number specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where a depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to 600 mm.

The design flood elevation is the height to which floodwaters are predicted to rise during passage or occurrence of the design flood.

Some flood hazard maps have areas denoted as AO Zones, identifying areas subject to sheet flow flooding, shallow flooding or ponding. Specific instruction for these zones is provided in the code because the maps specify a flood depth above grade rather than a height above datum.

FEMA refers to some areas subject to shallow flooding and/or unpredictable flow paths as AH Zones. AH Zones have specified base flood elevations and they are treated the same as the other A Zones with base flood elevations.

DESIGN PROFESSIONAL, REGISTERED. See “Registered design professional.”

DESIGN PROFESSIONAL IN RESPONSIBLE CHARGE, REGISTERED. See “Registered design professional in responsible charge.”

DESIGN STRENGTH. The product of the nominal strength and a resistance factor (or strength reduction factor).

This definition is needed to apply the strength design requirements in the code. The design strength is the nominal strength multiplied by a resistance or strength reduction factor that is less than one. The design strength and corresponding strength reduction factors are specified in the applicable material chapter of the code or a standard that is referenced therein.

DESIGNATED SEISMIC SYSTEM. Those nonstructural components that require design in accordance with Chapter 13 of SBC 301 and for which the component importance factor,  \( I_{p} \) , is greater than 1 in accordance with Section 13.1.3 of SBC 301.

Designated seismic systems are those architectural, electrical and mechanical components and systems in the referenced

===== Page 0098 =====
SBC 301 provisions that are assigned a component importance factor of 1.5. The importance factor is an indication that, compared with nonstructural components with the typical factor of 1.0, there is a higher level of importance placed on the system so that it will remain operational during and after an earthquake. This definition is important in correctly applying the provisions for special inspection and testing for designated seismic systems.

DETACHED BUILDING. A separate single-story building, without a basement or crawl space, used for the storage or use of hazardous materials and located an approved distance from all structures.

This term is used to define the type of structure the code recognizes for the use and storage of hazardous materials in excess of the maximum allowable quantities. While the definition addresses all hazardous materials, a detached storage building is only required for Group H-1, H-2 and H-3 structures as indicated in Sections 415.6.2 and 415.7, and Table 415.6.2. The location of the structure may be regulated by Section 415.6.1 based on the characteristics of the materials contained in the building.

## DETAILED PLAIN CONCRETE STRUCTURAL WALL. See Section 1905.

This definition is a modification of SBC 304 text and is therefore located in Section 1905.

DETECTABLE WARNING. A standardized surface feature built in or applied to walking surfaces or other elements to warn visually impaired persons of hazards on a circulation path.

A detectable warning is a change in texture that is detectable by a person with a vision impairment. Technical specifications for a detectable warning surface are set forth in ICC A117.1. Detectable warnings are only required for transit platform edges so that users can be confident of the warning that is intended to be communicated and not be confused by multiple, different surfaces intended to convey the same warning (see commentary, Section 1110.11).

DETECTOR, HEAT. A fire detector that senses heat, either abnormally high temperature or rate of rise, or both.

Heat detectors include fixed temperature detectors, rate compensation detectors and rate-of-rise detectors. The code requires all automatic fire detectors to be smoke detectors, except that heat detectors tested and approved in accordance with NFPA 72 may be used as an alternative to smoke detectors in rooms and spaces where, during normal operation, products of combustion are present in sufficient quantity to actuate a smoke detector.

DETONATION. An exothermic reaction characterized by the presence of a shock wave in the material which establishes and maintains the reaction. The reaction zone progresses through the material at a rate greater than the velocity of sound. The principal heating mechanism is one of shock compression. Detonations have an explosive effect.

Detonations are distinguished from deflagrations (which are produced by explosive gases, dusts, vapors and mists) by the speed with which they propagate a blast effect. Detonations occur much faster than deflagrations, since they propagate a combustion zone at a velocity greater than the speed of sound. Deflagrations propagate a combustion zone at a velocity less than the speed of sound. The speed of sound is approximately 335 m/s at sea level. Both detonations and deflagrations may produce explosive results when they occur in a confined space. Materials that are considered a detonation hazard are classified as Group H-1 materials in accordance with Section 307.3.

DETOXIFICATION FACILITIES. Facilities that provide treatment for substance abuse, serving care recipients who are incapable of self-preservation or who are harmful to themselves or others.

Persons in detoxification facilities may be physically incapable of self-preservation, or they may be confined within an area of a building for care or security purposes. See the commentary to Sections 308 and 407.

Care facilities are used by care recipients of varying acuity seeking a broad spectrum of available support services. These facilities span a wide range of occupancy types, including Groups E, I and R. The level of care provided is based on the condition and capabilities of an occupant, which, in turn, indicate appropriate standards for protection systems, both passive and active. See also the definitions for "24-hour basis," "Ambulatory care facility," "Group home," "Hospitals and psychiatric hospitals," "Incapable of self-preservation," "Medical care," "Nursing homes" and "Personal care service."

DIAPHRAGM. A horizontal or sloped system acting to transmit lateral forces to vertical elements of the lateral force resisting system. When the term “diaphragm” is used, it shall include horizontal bracing systems.

Floor and roof diaphragms act to transfer the lateral forces, such as wind or seismic loads, to the vertical resisting elements (e.g., shear walls, braced frames, moment frames, etc.), supporting them at their perimeter or intermittent locations.
DIAPHRAGM, BLOCKED. In light-frame

===== Page 0099 =====
construction, a diaphragm in which all sheathing edges not occurring on a framing member are supported on and fastened to blocking.

Unblocked diaphragms can resist low and moderate in-plane shear forces. Diaphragm sheathing may be applied with the long dimension of the sheathing either perpendicular or parallel to the main framing members. Where there is no blocking under the edge of the sheathing that is not supported by the main framing member, the diaphragm is considered to be unblocked. The ANSI/AWC Special Design Provisions for Wind and Seismic (SDPWS) contains separate tables for nailed diaphragms that are blocked and unblocked.

DIAPHRAGM BOUNDARY. In light-frame construction, a location where shear is transferred into or out of the diaphragm sheathing. Transfer is either to a boundary element or to another force-resisting element.

Diaphragm boundary is typically the connection between the floor or roof sheathing and the band board surrounding the diaphragm.

DIAPHRAGM CHORD. A diaphragm boundary element perpendicular to the applied load that is assumed to take axial stresses due to the diaphragm moment.

A diaphragm acts as a deep horizontal beam. The chords of the beam are the elements at the boundary of the diaphragm that are perpendicular to the direction of the applied load.

DIAPHRAGM, UNBLOCKED. A diaphragm that has edge nailing at supporting members only. Blocking between supporting structural members at panel edges is not included. Diaphragm panels are field nailed to supporting members.

Unblocked diaphragms can resist low and moderate shear forces. Diaphragm sheathing may be applied with the long dimension of the sheathing either perpendicular or parallel to the main framing members. Where the edge of the sheathing is not supported by the main framing member, the diaphragm is considered to be unblocked.

DIMENSIONS. This definition applies only to Chapter 21.

Different dimensions are used to designate sizes of masonry units and masonry elements. The terms denote the common meanings of various types of dimensions used in Chapter 21.

NOMINAL. The specified dimension plus an allowance for the joints with which the units are to be laid. Nominal dimensions are usually stated in whole numbers. Thickness is given first, followed by height and then length.
The nominal dimensions of a masonry unit are the specified dimensions, plus the specified thickness of one mortar joint. Nominal dimensions are used for architectural layout of masonry structures. Commentary Figure 202(10) shows nominal dimensions for a specific concrete masonry unit.

SPECIFIED. Dimensions specified for the manufacture or construction of a unit, joint or element.

The specified dimensions are prescribed in the construction documents. Commentary Figure 202(10) shows specified and nominal dimensions for a concrete masonry unit.

DIRECT ACCESS. A path of travel from a space to an immediately adjacent space through an opening in the common wall between the two spaces.

This term is related to the interior exit stairway associated with the lobby required for fire service access elevators (FSAE) and occupant evacuation elevators (OEE). In order for FSAE and OEE to provide the protection and necessary functions, a stairway needs to be located with direct access from the elevators themselves. See the commentaries for Sections 3007.6.1 and 3008.6.1.

DISPENSING. The pouring or transferring of any material from a container, tank or similar vessel, whereby vapors, dusts, fumes, mists or gases are liberated to the atmosphere.

This term refers to a specific operation whereby the act of transferring a material occurs and has a hazard associated with the liberation of the material in the forms listed in the definition. It is not “handling” and should not be confused with that term (see the definitions of “Closed system” and “Handling”).

DOOR, BALANCED. See “Balanced door.”

DOOR, LOW-ENERGY POWER-

OPERATED. See “Low-energy power-operated door.”

DOOR, POWER-ASSISTED. See “Power-assisted door.”

DOOR, POWER-OPERATED. See “Power-operated door.”

DOORWAY, EXIT ACCESS. See “Exit access doorway.”

DORMITORY. A space in a building where group sleeping accommodations are provided in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms, for persons not members of the same family group, under joint occupancy and single management, as in college dormitories.

Dormitories typically consist of a large room serving as a community sleeping room or many

===== Page 0100 =====
smaller rooms grouped together and serving as private or semiprivate sleeping rooms (sleeping units). A typical setting for dormitories is on college campuses. However, sleeping areas of a fire station and similar lodging facilities for occupants not of the same family group are also considered dormitories. Dormitories most often are not the permanent residence of the occupants. They are typically occupied only for a designated period of time, such as a school year. Though limited, the period of occupancy is usually more than 30 days, which provides the occupant with a familiarity of the structure such that the occupancy is not considered transient. A dormitory is classified as Group R-2 (see Section 310.3).

Structures containing a dormitory often have a cafeteria or central eating area and common recreational areas. Where such conditions exist, the structure must comply with the mixed occupancy provisions of the code [see Section 508 and Commentary Figure 202(11)]. See also the definition for “Sleeping unit.”

DRAFTSTOP. A material, device or construction installed to restrict the movement of air within open spaces of concealed areas of building components such as crawl spaces, floor/ceiling assemblies, roof/ceiling assemblies and attics.

Draftstopping is required in concealed combustible spaces to limit the movement of air, smoke and other products of combustion. Draftstopping materials are permitted to be combustible based on the rationale that a large and thick enough combustible material will act as a hindrance against the free movement of air, of flame/fire and of the products of combustion [see Commentary Figures 202(12) and 202(13) for typical drafts-topping applications (also see Section 718)]. Although the term “draftstopping” would seem to imply that its primary purpose is to hinder the circulation of air within the space, its intended purpose is to stop the movement of fire and products of combustion, as evidenced by the fact that draftstopping can be omitted in some cases provided appropriate automatic fire sprinkler protection is installed (see Sections 718.3 and 718.4).

## DRAG STRUT. See “Collector.”

DRY FLOODPROOFING. A combination of design modifications that results in a building or structure, including the attendant utilities and equipment and sanitary facilities, being watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capacity to resist loads as identified in SBC 301.

All residential buildings and most nonresidential buildings in flood hazard areas are elevated so that the lowest floors (including basements) are at or above the elevation required in ASCE 24. Under certain circumstances, nonresidential buildings (and nonresidential portions of mixed-use buildings) may be designed and constructed to incorporate dry floodproofing modifications (structural and nonstructural additions, changes, adjustments or other measures) that are designed to keep water out, and to withstand hydrostatic and hydro-dynamic loads. Guidance on dry floodproofing is in FEMA P-936, Floodproofing Non-Residential Buildings.

## DRY-CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING

AGENT. A powder composed of small particles, usually of sodium bicarbonate, potassium bicarbonate, urea-potassium-based bicarbonate, potassium chloride or mono ammonium phosphate, with added particulate material supplemented by special treatment to provide resistance to packing, resistance to moisture absorption (caking) and the proper flow capabilities.

A dry-chemical system extinguishes a fire by placing a chemical barrier between the fire and oxygen, which acts to smother a fire. This system is best known for protecting commercial ranges, commercial fryers and exhaust hoods. Wet-chemical extinguishing systems, however, are more commonly used for new installations in commercial cooking equipment.

The type of dry chemical to be used in the extinguishing system is a function of the hazard expected. The type of dry chemical used in a system must not be changed unless it has been proven changeable by a testing laboratory, is recommended by the manufacturer of the equipment and is acceptable to the fire code official for the hazard expected. Additional guidance on the use of various dry-chemical agents can be found in NFPA 17, which gives minimum requirements for the design, installation, testing, inspection, approval, operation and maintenance of dry-chemical extinguishing systems.

DWELLING. A building that contains one or two dwelling units used, intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied for living purposes.

Dwellings are buildings intended to serve as residences for one or two families. Dwellings can be owner occupied or rented. The term "dwelling," which refers to the building itself, is defined to distinguish it from the term "dwelling unit," which is a single living unit within a building. It is important to recognize that the code is not intended to regulate detached one and two-family dwellings and townhouses that

===== Page 0101 =====
are regulated by SBC 1101/1102 (see Section 101.2). See also the definition for "Townhouse."

DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

A dwelling unit, as stated, is a residential unit that contains all of the necessary facilities for independent living. This provides a single, independent unit that serves a single family or single group of individuals. This terminology is used throughout the code for the determination of the application of various provisions. A dwelling unit is also distinguished from a sleeping unit, which does not have all of the features of a dwelling unit and must comply with a different set of requirements (see the definition for "Sleeping unit"). A building containing one or more dwelling units is a "dwelling" (see the definitions for "Dwelling" and "Townhouse"). A building containing one or more dwelling units is regulated as a Group R-2 occupancy. The most common term used for such a building is an apartment house or condominium. To be considered a Group R-3 occupancy, the structure must have one or two dwelling units, or be subdivided by fire walls between every unit or every two units.

DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY. A dwelling unit where all permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating and cooking are contained in a single room.

Efficiency dwelling units are better known as studio apartments, where a single room is utilized for all living, sleeping, dining and cooking activities. This definition reflects this single-space concept. It has also been clarified that an efficiency unit is a specific type of dwelling unit and would be regulated as such where scoped throughout this code.

DWELLING UNIT OR SLEEPING UNIT, MULTISTORY. See “Multistory unit.”

EGRESS COURT. A court or yard which provides access to a public way for one or more exits.

The egress court requirements address situations where the exit discharge portion of the means of egress passes through confined areas near the building and therefore faces a hazard not normally found in the exit discharge (see Section 1029).

ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING
STATION. One or more vehicle spaces served by

an electric vehicle charging system.

The number of electric cars on the road is increasing every day. The locations where these electric vehicles stop to charge include a parking space and an electric vehicle charger. These facilities are treated as a service that is addressed in Sections 406 and 1107.

ELECTRICAL CIRCUIT PROTECTIVE SYSTEM. A specific construction of devices, materials, or coatings installed as a fire-resistive barrier system applied to electrical system components, such as cable trays, conduits and other raceways, open run cables and conductors, cables, and conductors.

Electrical circuit protective systems are used primarily for fire protection of wiring and cables that serve smokeproof enclosure ventilation systems and fire service access elevators. These systems are an alternative to conventional rated construction such as fire barriers and horizontal assemblies.

ELEVATOR GROUP. A grouping of elevators in a building located adjacent or directly across from one another that responds to common hall call buttons.

This definition clarifies the application of the emergency voice/alarm communication system requirements in Section 907.5.2.2 as to the locations, called “paging zones,” where system speakers are required (see commentary, Section 907.5.2.2).

EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEM. A system to provide indication and warning of emergency situations involving hazardous materials.

Because of the potentially volatile nature of hazardous materials, an emergency alarm system is required outside of interior building rooms or areas containing hazardous materials in excess of the maximum allowable quantities permitted in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2). The emergency alarm, upon actuation by an alarm-initiating device, is intended to alert the occupants to an emergency condition involving hazardous materials. The initiation of the emergency alarm can be by manual or automatic means, depending on the hazard and the specific requirements for the type of hazard (see Section 908).

EMERGENCY CONTROL STATION. An approved location on the premises where signals from emergency equipment are received and which is staffed by trained personnel.

This definition identifies the room or area located in the hazardous production materials (HPM) facility that is utilized for the purpose of receiving various alarms and signals. The smoke detectors located in the building's recirculation ventilation ducts, the gas monitoring/ detection system and the telephone/fire protective signaling systems located outside of HPM storage rooms are all required to be connected to the emergency control station. The location of the emergency

===== Page 0102 =====
control station must be approved by the building official. An approved location should be based on personnel being able to adequately monitor the necessary alarms and signals, and on the fire department being able to gain access quickly when responding to emergency situations. Additionally, the room must be occupied by persons who are trained to respond to the various alarms and signals in the appropriate fashion.

EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENING. An operable exterior window, door or other similar device that provides for a means of escape and access for rescue in the event of an emergency.

These are commonly windows that are sized and located such that they can be used to exit a building directly from a basement or bedroom during an emergency condition. The openings are also used by emergency personnel to rescue the occupants in a building (see Section 1031). Windows are never considered to be exit or exit access components for purposes of meeting minimum number of exit requirements. An emergency escape and rescue opening could be a type of door, such as a basement door with direct access to an exterior stairway or a door to a balcony. Bulkhead-style cellar doors could also be evaluated as possible emergency escape and rescue openings.

EMERGENCY POWER SYSTEM. A source of automatic electric power of a required capacity and duration to operate required life safety, fire alarm, detection and ventilation systems in the event of a failure of the primary power. Emergency power systems are required for electrical loads where interruption of the primary power could result in loss of human life or serious injuries.

Section 2702 of the code mandates the installation of emergency power systems and standby power systems for various buildings and occupancies in accordance with SBC 801, (or its equivalent in SBC 401) and NFPA 110 and 111. This definition is intended to provide clarity for the fire code official as to exactly what systems are considered to be emergency power systems and is consistent with definitions in NFPA 110 and NFPA 111. A primary difference between emergency and standby power systems is that emergency power systems are essentially life safety systems (e.g., exit signage and egress illumination), whereas standby power systems focus more on the continued operation of critical equipment in a building (e.g., elevators, fire pumps). Another difference between the two is the time limit within which the power supply activates. More specifically, emergency power is available in 10 seconds after primary power fails, whereas standby power is available in 60 seconds. Both types of systems are required to operate for a minimum of two hours under full design load unless otherwise indicated in Section 2702. Emergency power systems are required for the following systems or features, among others:

1 Emergency voice/alarm communication systems (24-hour duration).

2 Emergency alarm systems.

3 Exit signs.

4 Means of egress illumination.

5 HPM facility equipment.

See also the commentary to the definition of "Standby power system" and Section 2702.

## EMERGENCY VOICE/ALARM

COMMUNICATIONS. Dedicated manual or automatic facilities for originating and distributing voice instructions, as well as alert and evacuation signals pertaining to a fire emergency, to the occupants of a building.

An emergency voice/alarm communication system is a special feature of fire alarm systems in buildings with special evacuation considerations, such as a high-rise building or a large assembly space. Emergency voice/alarm communication systems automatically communicate a fire emergency message to all occupants of a building on a general or selective basis. Such systems also enable the fire service to manually transmit voice instructions to the building occupants about a fire emergency condition and the action to be taken for evacuation or movement to another area of the building. Although most systems use pre-recorded messages, some now use computer synthesized voices to communicate messages that allow customized messages unique to the facility.

EMITTANCE. The ratio of radiant heat flux emitted by a specimen to that emitted by a blackbody at the same temperature and under the same conditions.

The term “emittance” is used in various sections of the code and in the definition for radiant barrier. It is consistent with the definition found in ASHRAE and ASTM standards. Emittance is a way to quantify how much thermal energy an assembly can emit at standard conditions.

EMPLOYEE WORK AREA. All or any portion of a space used only by employees and only for work. Corridors, toilet rooms, kitchenettes and break rooms are not employee work areas.

An employee work area is different in an office versus on a factory line. An employee work area will most likely expand past the station or desk where an employee performs his or her

===== Page 0103 =====
job. An employee work area could include common use spaces, but not public use spaces. Depending on the duties of the employee, it may also include copy areas, stock rooms, filing areas, an assembly line, etc. (see also the commentaries for the definitions of "Common use" and "Public-use areas"). Note that not all employee-only areas are considered part of employee work areas (e.g., bathrooms, corridors, breakrooms).

ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEM, ELECTROCHEMICAL. An energy storage system that stores energy and produces electricity using chemical reactions. It includes, among others, battery ESS and capacitor ESS.

This definition scopes out what type of system would be included in associated requirements found within the code. These types of systems, which are becoming very prevalent, often require special protection due to the unique potential fire and explosion hazards they pose. The code more generally uses the term "Energy Storage System (ESS)," which includes the systems defined by this term. This specific term is found within Table 414.5.1. The focus of this particular term as used in SBC 201 is on adding deflagration venting or explosion prevention systems where Section 1207 of SBC 801 would require such venting. There is often a hazard of a build-up of hydrogen, for larger systems, when such systems go into thermal runaway. Note that there are many other uses of the term ESS, which encompasses electrochemical ESS.

ENGINEERED WOOD RIM BOARD. A full-depth structural composite lumber, wood structural panel, structural glued laminated timber or prefabricated wood I-joist member designed to transfer horizontal (shear) and vertical (compression) loads, provide attachment for diaphragm sheathing, siding and exterior deck ledgers, and provide lateral support at the ends of floor or roof joists or rafters.

Engineered rim board is a key structural element in many engineered wood floor applications where both structural load path through the perimeter member and dimensional change compatibility are design considerations. Section 2303.1.13 provides the compliance standards for this product.

ENTRANCE, PUBLIC. See “Public entrance.”

ENTRANCE, RESTRICTED. See “Restricted entrance.”

ENTRANCE, SERVICE. See “Service entrance.” EQUIPMENT PLATFORM. An unoccupied, elevated platform used exclusively for mechanical systems or industrial process equipment, including the associated elevated walkways, stairways, alternating tread devices and ladders necessary to access the platform (see Section 505.3).

A distinction is made between equipment platforms and mezzanines by way of this definition. Equipment platforms, covered in Section 505.3, are unoccupied and used exclusively for housing equipment and providing access thereto, and are not subject to the requirements for mezzanines. Their purpose could also be to allow access for maintenance, repair or modification of elevated or very large equipment. Equipment platforms allow efficient use of high bay areas by locating infrequently accessed equipment or processes overhead without the occupant load or increasing the hazard to occupants in the room. Elevated floor areas that do not meet this definition would be subject to the requirements for mezzanines or may be considered additional stories, depending on the circumstances.

ESSENTIAL FACILITIES. Buildings and other structures that are intended to remain operational in the event of extreme environmental loading from flood, wind or earthquakes.

This definition is needed to facilitate identification of Risk Category IV buildings under Section 1604.5. This is critical in determining the design earthquake, flood and wind load criteria that apply to the facility.

EXHAUSTED ENCLOSURE. An appliance or piece of equipment that consists of a top, a back and two sides providing a means of local exhaust for capturing gases, fumes, vapors and mists. Such enclosures include laboratory hoods, exhaust fume hoods and similar appliances and equipment used to locally retain and exhaust the gases, fumes, vapors and mists that could be released. Rooms or areas provided with general ventilation, in themselves, are not exhausted enclosures.

Exhausted enclosures, such as laboratory hoods or exhaust fume hoods, are utilized to contain hazardous fumes and vapors. The use of an approved exhausted enclosure may allow an increase in the maximum allowable quantities per control area of a given hazardous material. Exhausted enclosures are typically utilized when highly toxic or toxic compressed gases are involved. The exhausted enclosures are required to be of noncombustible construction, have specific ventilation criteria and be protected by an approved fire-extinguishing system.

EXISTING BUILDING. A building erected prior to the date of adoption of the appropriate code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.

===== Page 0104 =====
Existing buildings are defined as buildings that were previously built or that have valid permits.

EXISTING STRUCTURE. A structure erected prior to the date of adoption of the appropriate code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.

Existing structures are defined as structures that were previously built or that have valid permits.

EXIT. That portion of a means of egress system between the exit access and the exit discharge or public way. Exit components include exterior exit doors at the level of exit discharge, interior exit stairways and ramps, exit passageways, exterior exit stairways and ramps and horizontal exits.

Exits are the critical element of the means of egress system that building occupants travel through to reach the exterior at the level of exit discharge. Exit stairways and ramps from upper and lower stories must be separated from adjacent areas with fire-resistance-rated construction. The fire-resistance-rated construction serves as a barrier between the fire and the means of egress and protects occupants while they travel through the exit. Separation by fire-resistance-rated construction is not required, however, where the exit leads directly to the exterior at the level of exit discharge (e.g., exterior door at grade). Commentary Figure 202(14) illustrates three different types of exits: interior exit stairway, exterior exit stairway and exterior exit door. A horizontal exit, while not discharging to the outside, does discharge to another building or refuge area. The door to the refuge area is through a fire wall or fire barrier (see the definition for "Exit, horizontal" and Section 1026).

EXIT, HORIZONTAL. See “Horizontal exit.”

EXIT ACCESS. That portion of a means of egress system that leads from any occupied portion of a building or structure to an exit.

The exit access portion of the means of egress consists of all floor areas that lead from usable spaces within the building to the exit or exits serving that floor area. Crawl spaces and concealed attic and roof spaces are not considered to be part of the exit access. As shown in Commentary Figure 202(15), the exit access begins at the furthest points within each room or space and ends at the entrance to the exit.

EXIT ACCESS DOORWAY. A door or access point along the path of egress travel from an occupied room, area or space where the path of egress enters an intervening room, corridor, exit access stairway or ramp.
Exit access doorways are used to design many critical aspects of the means of egress, including arrangement, number, separation, opening protection and exit sign placement. The term “doorway” has traditionally been limited to those situations where an actual opening, either with or without a door, is present. The presence of the phrase “access point,” clarifies that the definition includes specific points in the means of egress that may not include a “door,” such as where an unenclosed exit access stairway is used in the egress path.

EXIT ACCESS RAMP. A ramp within the exit access portion of the means of egress system.

Unenclosed ramps may serve as part of the route for exit access where floor levels have changes in elevation. For the limited situations where exit access ramps can be used between stories, see Sections 1006.3 and 1019. Exit access elements are included in the travel distance requirements unless specifically exempted (e.g., open parking garages, open-air assembly seating) (see Section 1017.3.1).

EXIT ACCESS STAIRWAY. A stairway with the exit access portion of the means of egress system.

Unenclosed steps and stairways may serve as part of the route for exit access where floor levels have changes in elevation. For the limited situations where exit access stairways can be used between stories, see Sections 1006.3 and 1019. Exit access elements are included in the travel distance requirements unless specifically exempted (e.g., open parking garages, open-air assembly seating) (see Section 1017.3.1).

EXIT DISCHARGE. That portion of a means of egress system between the termination of an exit and a public way.

The exit discharge will typically begin where the building occupants reach the exterior at or very near grade level. It provides occupants with a path of travel away from the building. All components between the building and the public way are considered to be the exit discharge, regardless of the distance. In areas of sloping terrain, it is possible to have steps or stairs in the exit discharge leading to the public way. The exit discharge is part of the means of egress and, therefore, its components are subject to the requirements of the code [see Commentary Figures 202(14) and 202(16) and Section 1028].

EXIT DISCHARGE, LEVEL OF. The story at the point at which an exit terminates and an exit discharge begins.

This term is intended to describe the story where the transition from exit-to-exit discharge occurs. At this level, the occupant needs only

===== Page 0105 =====
to move in a substantially horizontal path to move along exit discharge [see Commentary Figure 202(17)]. Since the level is a volume rather than a horizontal plane, exterior exit steps may be part of the exit discharge where they provide access to the level that is closest to grade.

EXIT PASSAGEWAY. An exit component that is separated from other interior spaces of a building or structure by fire resistance rated construction and opening protectives and provides for a protected path of egress travel in a horizontal direction to an exit or to the exit discharge.

This term refers to a horizontal portion of the means of egress that serves as an exit element. Since an exit passageway is considered an exit element, it must be protected and separated as required by the code for exits (see Section 1024). Exit passageways between a vertical exit enclosure and an exterior exit door are typically found on the level of exit discharge to provide a protected path from a centrally located exit stairway to the exit discharge. In taller buildings that reduce floor sizes as they move up (sometimes called a wedding cake building), exit passageways may be utilized at "transfer floors" as stairway locations shift to move the vertical shafts out as the floor size increases. Exit passageways that lead to an exterior exit door are commonly used in malls to satisfy the travel distance in buildings having a large floor area.

EXPANDED VINYL WALL COVERING. Wall covering consisting of a woven textile backing, an expanded vinyl base coat layer and a nonexpanded vinyl skin coat. The expanded base coat layer is a homogeneous vinyl layer that contains a blowing agent. During processing, the blowing agent decomposes, causing this layer to expand by forming closed cells. The total thickness of the wall covering is approximately 1.4 mm to 1.78 mm.

Expanded vinyl wall coverings are manufactured with a textile backing, an expanded vinyl base coat layer consisting of closed cells and a vinyl skin coat. Expanded vinyl wall coverings are subject to the requirements of Section 803.7.

EXPLOSION. An effect produced by the sudden violent expansion of gases, which may be accompanied by a shock wave or disruption, or both, of enclosing materials or structures. An explosion could result from any of the following:

1 Chemical changes such as rapid oxidation, deflagration or detonation, decomposition of molecules and runaway polymerization (usually detonations).
2 Physical changes such as pressure tank ruptures.

3 Atomic changes (nuclear fission or fusion).

Materials that pose a threat of explosion are classified as Group H-1 where present in quantities exceeding the maximum allowable quantities in Table 307.1(1) and are required to be kept in a detached storage building meeting the requirements of Section 415.7 of this code and Chapter 56 of SBC 801.

EXPLOSIVE. A chemical compound, mixture or device, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes, but is not limited to: dynamite, black powder, pellet powder, initiating explosives, detonators, safety fuses, squibs, detonating cord, igniter cord, and igniters.

The term “explosive” includes any material determined to be within the scope of USC Title 18: Chapter 40 and also includes any material classified as an explosive other than consumer fireworks, 1.4G by the hazardous materials regulations of DOTn 49 CFR Parts 100-185.

HIGH EXPLOSIVE. Explosive material, such as dynamite, which can be caused to detonate by means of a No. 8 test blasting cap when unconfined. LOW EXPLOSIVE. Explosive material that will burn or deflagrate when ignited. It is characterized by a rate of reaction that is less than the speed of sound. Examples of low explosives include, but are not limited to: black powder; safety fuse; igniters; igniter cord; fuse lighters; fireworks; and propellants, 1.3C.

MASS-DETONATING EXPLOSIVES. Division 1.1, 1.2 and 1.5 explosives alone or in combination, or loaded into various types of ammunition or containers, most of which can be expected to explode virtually instantaneously when a small portion is subjected to fire, severe concussion, impact, the impulse of an initiating agent or the effect of a considerable discharge of energy from without. Materials that react in this manner represent a mass explosion hazard. Such an explosive will normally cause severe structural damage to adjacent objects. Explosive propagation could occur immediately to other items of ammunition and explosives stored sufficiently close to and not adequately protected from the initially exploding pile with a time interval short enough so that two or more quantities must be considered as one for quantity-distance purposes.

UN/DOTn CLASS 1 EXPLOSIVES. The former classification system used by DOTn included the terms “high” and “low” explosives as defined herein. The following terms further define

===== Page 0106 =====
explosives under the current system applied by DOTn for all explosive materials defined as hazard Class 1 materials. Compatibility group letters are used in concert with the division to specify further limitations on each division noted (i.e., the letter G identifies the material as a pyrotechnic substance or article containing a pyrotechnic substance and similar materials).

DIVISION 1.1. Explosives that have a mass explosion hazard. A mass explosion is one which affects almost the entire load instantaneously.

DIVISION 1.2. Explosives that have a projection hazard but not a mass explosion hazard.

DIVISION 1.3. Explosives that have a fire hazard and either a minor blast hazard or a minor projection hazard or both, but not a mass explosion hazard.

DIVISION 1.4. Explosives that pose a minor explosion hazard. The explosive effects are largely confined to the package and no projection of fragments of appreciable size or range is to be expected. An external fire must not cause virtually instantaneous explosion of almost the entire contents of the package.

DIVISION 1.5. Very insensitive explosives. This division is comprised of substances that have a mass explosion hazard, but that are so insensitive there is very little probability of initiation or of transition from burning to detonation under normal conditions of transport.

DIVISION 1.6. Extremely insensitive articles which do not have a mass explosion hazard. This division is comprised of articles that contain only extremely insensitive detonating substances and which demonstrate a negligible probability of accidental initiation or propagation.

Explosives either detonate or deflagrate when initiated by heat, shock or electric current. While these materials are normally designed and intended to be initiated by detonators under controlled conditions, heat, shock or electric current from uncontrolled sources may initiate these materials to produce an explosion. DOTn classifies explosives in six classes according to the degree of hazard posed by the material. The most dangerous of these materials is capable of almost simultaneous detonation of all of the material in a single load or store. The least-sensitive explosives produce blasts limited to the packages in which they are transported. This definition of explosives includes materials such as detonators, blasting agents and water gels. Examples of these materials are listed in DOTy 27 CFR, Part 55.23.

Explosive materials are subdivided into high, low, mass-detonating and UN/DOTn Class 1 explosives. High explosives and mass-detonating explosives are typically classified as Group H-1 and present a detonation hazard. Low explosives more commonly are classified as Group H-2, as they tend to deflagrate or burn upon ignition. Mass-detonating devices present a greater threat to adjacent objects and structures. SBC 801, therefore, contains provisions in the form of Table 5605.3 to deal with the separation distances for mass explosion hazards.

The definitions cited in this section are consistent with DOTn 49 CFR, Part 173.50. The hazards of this group of materials vary with the nature of the material, with some explosives being very sensitive and others less sensitive. Some explosives detonate, others deflagrate, and the hazards of others are limited to intense burning. The classification system was designed to correlate with the system of classification developed under recommendations of the UN, wherein all explosive materials are placed into a hazard class of Class 1. This class is further divided into six divisions: Divisions 1.1 through 1.6.

EXTERIOR EXIT RAMP. An exit component that serves to meet one or more means of egress design requirements, such as required number of exits or exit access travel distance, and is open to yards, courts or public ways.

Requirements for an exterior exit ramp are different from those for an interior exit ramp. Exterior exit ramps are typically outside of the building, provide exits from levels above or below the level of exit discharge, and are exposed to at least some elements of weather. The protection requirements, therefore, are for the exterior walls between the building and the ramp, rather than interior walls. For the ramp requirements, see Section 1012. For specifics for exterior exit ramps, see Section 1027.

EXTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAY. An exit component that serves to meet one or more means of egress design requirements, such as required number of exits or exit access travel distance, and is open to yards, courts or public ways.

Requirements for an exterior exit stairway are different from those for an interior exit stairway. Exterior exit stairways are typically outside of the building, provide exits from above or below the level of exit discharge, and are exposed to at least some elements of weather. The protection requirements, therefore, are for the exterior walls between the building and the stairway, rather than interior walls. For the stairway requirements, see Section 1011. For specifics for exterior exit stairways, see Section 1027.

EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEMS (EIFS). EIFS are nonstructural,

===== Page 0107 =====
explosives under the current system applied by DOTn for all explosive materials defined as hazard Class 1 materials. Compatibility group letters are used in concert with the division to specify further limitations on each division noted (i.e., the letter G identifies the material as a pyrotechnic substance or article containing a pyrotechnic substance and similar materials).

DIVISION 1.1. Explosives that have a mass explosion hazard. A mass explosion is one which affects almost the entire load instantaneously.

DIVISION 1.2. Explosives that have a projection hazard but not a mass explosion hazard.

DIVISION 1.3. Explosives that have a fire hazard and either a minor blast hazard or a minor projection hazard or both, but not a mass explosion hazard.

DIVISION 1.4. Explosives that pose a minor explosion hazard. The explosive effects are largely confined to the package and no projection of fragments of appreciable size or range is to be expected. An external fire must not cause virtually instantaneous explosion of almost the entire contents of the package.

DIVISION 1.5. Very insensitive explosives. This division is comprised of substances that have a mass explosion hazard, but that are so insensitive there is very little probability of initiation or of transition from burning to detonation under normal conditions of transport.

DIVISION 1.6. Extremely insensitive articles which do not have a mass explosion hazard. This division is comprised of articles that contain only extremely insensitive detonating substances and which demonstrate a negligible probability of accidental initiation or propagation.

Explosives either detonate or deflagrate when initiated by heat, shock or electric current. While these materials are normally designed and intended to be initiated by detonators under controlled conditions, heat, shock or electric current from uncontrolled sources may initiate these materials to produce an explosion. DOTn classifies explosives in six classes according to the degree of hazard posed by the material. The most dangerous of these materials is capable of almost simultaneous detonation of all of the material in a single load or store. The least-sensitive explosives produce blasts limited to the packages in which they are transported. This definition of explosives includes materials such as detonators, blasting agents and water gels. Examples of these materials are listed in DOTy 27 CFR, Part 55.23.

Explosive materials are subdivided into high, low, mass-detonating and UN/DOTn Class 1 explosives. High explosives and mass-detonating explosives are typically classified as Group H-1 and present a detonation hazard. Low explosives more commonly are classified as Group H-2, as they tend to deflagrate or burn upon ignition. Mass-detonating devices present a greater threat to adjacent objects and structures. SBC 801, therefore, contains provisions in the form of Table 5605.3 to deal with the separation distances for mass explosion hazards.

The definitions cited in this section are consistent with DOTn 49 CFR, Part 173.50. The hazards of this group of materials vary with the nature of the material, with some explosives being very sensitive and others less sensitive. Some explosives detonate, others deflagrate, and the hazards of others are limited to intense burning. The classification system was designed to correlate with the system of classification developed under recommendations of the UN, wherein all explosive materials are placed into a hazard class of Class 1. This class is further divided into six divisions: Divisions 1.1 through 1.6.

EXTERIOR EXIT RAMP. An exit component that serves to meet one or more means of egress design requirements, such as required number of exits or exit access travel distance, and is open to yards, courts or public ways.

Requirements for an exterior exit ramp are different from those for an interior exit ramp. Exterior exit ramps are typically outside of the building, provide exits from levels above or below the level of exit discharge, and are exposed to at least some elements of weather. The protection requirements, therefore, are for the exterior walls between the building and the ramp, rather than interior walls. For the ramp requirements, see Section 1012. For specifics for exterior exit ramps, see Section 1027.

EXTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAY. An exit component that serves to meet one or more means of egress design requirements, such as required number of exits or exit access travel distance, and is open to yards, courts or public ways.

Requirements for an exterior exit stairway are different from those for an interior exit stairway. Exterior exit stairways are typically outside of the building, provide exits from above or below the level of exit discharge, and are exposed to at least some elements of weather. The protection requirements, therefore, are for the exterior walls between the building and the stairway, rather than interior walls. For the stairway requirements, see Section 1011. For specifics for exterior exit stairways, see Section 1027.

EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEMS (EIFS). EIFS are nonstructural,

===== Page 0108 =====
defined to clarify the intent of the code (see Section 1704). Common construction items are often fabricated under standards that are referenced in the code and many of these provide for quality assurance by third-party supervision. Since special inspections are analogous to such quality assurance programs, in these cases it is not warranted to also require special inspections.

FABRICATION AREA. An area within a semiconductor fabrication facility and related research and development areas in which there are processes using hazardous production materials. Such areas are allowed to include ancillary rooms or areas such as dressing rooms and offices that are directly related to the fabrication area processes.

This definition describes the basic component of a Hazardous Production Material (HPM) facility. The code uses this definition to provide certain material limitations on both a quantity and density basis, and to require enclosure of the fabrication areas with fire barrier assemblies. The fabrication area of an HPM facility is the area where the hazardous materials are actively handled and processed. The fabrication area includes accessory rooms and spaces, such as workstations and employee dressing rooms.

FACILITY. All or any portion of buildings, structures, site improvements, elements and pedestrian or vehicular routes located on a site.

This term is intentionally broad and includes all portions within a site and all aspects of that site that contain features required to be accessible. This includes parking areas, exterior walkways leading to accessible features, recreational facilities such as playgrounds and picnic areas, as well as any structures on the site (see also the commentary to the definition of "Site").

FACTORED LOAD. The product of a nominal load and a load factor.

This definition explains the term ‘factored loads’ so that the loads to be applied in strength design are clear. Factored loads are determined for strength design for load and resistance factor design (LRFD) by multiplying nominal load (see the definition of ‘Nominal loads’) by a load factor, as in the load combinations of Section 1605.2. While this definition is clear for most loading, the exception would be the wind load, W, and earthquake load, E, both of which are computed directly at a strength level without the need for applying a load factor. This is evidenced by a load factor of 1.0 applied to earthquake and wind loads in the strength load combinations of Section 1605.2.

FENESTRATION. Products classified as either vertical fenestration or skylights and sloped glazing, installed in such a manner as to preserve the weather-resistant barrier of the wall or roof in which they are installed. Fenestration includes products with glass or other transparent or translucent materials.

The term “fenestration” refers to both opaque and glazed doors and the light transmitting areas of a wall or roof. It primarily means windows and skylights. The IECC/ or its Equivalent in SBC 601/SBC 602 set performance requirements for fenestration by establishing separate requirements that differ from wall and roof requirements based on the type of fenestration. For certain categories of buildings, the total fenestration area is limited.

FENESTRATION, VERTICAL. Windows that are fixed or movable, opaque doors, glazed doors, glazed block and combination opaque and glazed doors installed in a wall at less than 15 degrees from the vertical.

The definition provides clarity as to which fenestrations are considered vertical and placed in walls versus those which are part of a roof. The codes, especially the IECC/or its equivalent in SBC 601/602, have distinct requirements for vertical fenestration as opposed to skylights located in roofs.

FIBERBOARD. A fibrous, homogeneous panel made from lignocellulosic fibers (usually wood or cane) and having a density of less than 500 kg per m \( ^{3} \)  but more than 160 kg per m \( ^{3} \) .

Fiberboard is used primarily as an insulating board and for decorative purposes but may also be used as wall or roof sheathing. The cellulosic components of fiberboard are broken down to individual fibers and molded to create the bond between the fibers. Other ingredients may be added during processing to provide or improve certain properties, such as strength and water resistance, in addition to surface finishes for decorative products. Fiberboard is used in all locations where panels are desirable, including wall sheathing, insulation of walls and roofs, roof decking, doors and interior finish.

FIBER-CEMENT (BACKER BOARD, SIDING, SOFFIT, TRIM AND UNDERLAYMENT) PRODUCTS.

Manufactured thin section composites of hydraulic cementitious matrices and discrete non-asbestos fibers.

This definition enables the code user to apply the correct material requirements for fiber cement products in Chapter 14, 23 and 25.

FIBER-REINFORCED POLYMER. A polymeric composite material consisting of reinforcement fibers, such as glass, impregnated with a fiber-binding polymer which is then molded

===== Page 0109 =====
and hardened. Fiber-reinforced polymers are permitted to contain cores laminated between fiber-reinforced polymer facings.

Fiber-reinforced polymer is used in building construction for purposes such as light-transmitting sheet panels, structural forms for concrete, sandwich panel construction and the replication of historic building ornamentation. The purpose of this definition is to describe the composition of this material in order to properly identify the element that is to comply with Section 2613.

FIELD NAILING. See “Nailing, field.”

FIRE ALARM BOX, MANUAL. See “Manual fire alarm box.”

FIRE ALARM CONTROL UNIT. A system component that receives inputs from automatic and manual fire alarm devices and may be capable of supplying power to detection devices and transponders or off-premises transmitters. The control unit may be capable of providing a transfer of power to the notification appliances and transfer of condition to relays or devices.

The fire alarm control unit (panel) acts as a point where all signals initiated within the protected building are received before the signal is transmitted to a constantly attended location. As the name implies, it also contains controls to test and manually activate or silence systems.

FIRE ALARM SIGNAL. A signal initiated by a fire alarm-initiating device such as a manual fire alarm box, automatic fire detector, waterflow switch or other device whose activation is indicative of the presence of a fire or fire signature.

This signal is transmitted to a fire alarm control unit as a warning that requires immediate action. The personnel at the constantly attended location are trained to immediately respond to a fire alarm signal, which indicates the presence of a fire. A fire alarm signal assumes an actual fire has been detected (see the definition of "Alarm signal"). The fire alarm signal is not the signal used to notify the occupants of an emergency condition. Such an alert would involve the audible alarm, visual alarm or emergency voice/alarm notification appliances.

FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A system or portion of a combination system consisting of components and circuits arranged to monitor and annunciate the status of fire alarm or supervisory signal-initiating devices and to initiate the appropriate response to those signals.

Fire alarm systems are installed in buildings to limit fire casualties and property losses by notifying the occupants of the building, the fire department or both of an emergency condition.
The alarm notification appliances associated with fire alarm systems are intended to be evacuation alarms. All fire alarm systems must be designed and installed to comply with NFPA 72. The term is among the most generic used in the code. It does not necessarily imply an automatic or manual system, nor does it identify what type of notification, if any, should be provided. The definition indicates that an appropriate response must be provided but does not indicate what that response must be. The appropriate responses are identified within the respective sections of Section 907.

FIRE AREA. The aggregate floor area enclosed and bounded by fire walls, fire barriers, exterior walls or horizontal assemblies of a building. Areas of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included in the fire area if such areas are included within the horizontal projection of the roof or floor next above.

This term is used to describe a specific and controlled area within a building that may consist of a portion of the floor area within a single story, one entire story or the combined floor area of several stories, depending on how these areas are enclosed and separated from other floor areas. Where a fire barrier with a fire-resistance rating in accordance with Section 707.3.10 divides the floor area of a one-story building, the floor area on each side of the wall would constitute a separate fire area, where a horizontal assembly separating the two stories in a two-story building is fire-resistance rated in accordance with Section 711.2.4, each story would be a separate fire area. In cases where mezzanines are present, the floor area of the mezzanine is included in the fire area calculations, even though the area of the mezzanine does not contribute to the building area calculations. See the

Note that fire walls are one way of creating fire areas but are typically used to create separate buildings.

FIRE BARRIER. A fire-resistance-rated wall assembly of materials designed to restrict the spread of fire in which continuity is maintained.

The term represents wall assemblies with a fire-resistance rating that are constructed in accordance with Section 707. Even though the definition applies to walls, horizontal assemblies also can be fire barriers. See the definition of “Horizontal assembly” and the requirements in Section 711 that would apply to floor and roof assemblies designed to restrict the spread of fire. See Commentary Figure 202(18) for examples of fire barriers and

===== Page 0110 =====
Commentary Figure 202(29) for examples of horizontal assemblies.

FIRE COMMAND CENTER. The principal attended or unattended location where the status of detection, alarm communications and control systems is displayed, and from which the systems can be manually controlled.

Fire command centers are communication centers where dedicated manual and automatic facilities are located for the origination, control and transmission of information and instruction pertaining to a fire emergency to the occupants (including fire department personnel) of the building. Fire command centers must provide facilities for the control and display of the status of all fire protection (detection, signaling, etc.) systems. These stations must be located in secure areas as approved by the building official. Often this is a location near the primary building entrance. Fire command centers also may be combined with other building operations and security facilities where permitted by the building official; however, operating controls for use by the fire department must be clearly marked.

FIRE DAMPER. A listed device installed in ducts and air transfer openings designed to close automatically upon detection of heat and resist the passage of flame. Fire dampers are classified for use in either static systems that will automatically shut down in the event of a fire, or in dynamic systems that continue to operate during a fire. A dynamic fire damper is tested and rated for closure under elevated temperature airflow.

Fire dampers are used primarily in heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) duct systems that pass through fire-resistance-rated walls or floors. Dampers may also be installed in rated walls independent of HVAC duct systems. Dampers are provided to maintain the fire-resistance rating of the penetrated assembly. Fire dampers are regulated by UL 555. See also the commentary to the definition for "Smoke damper."

FIRE DETECTOR, AUTOMATIC. A device designed to detect the presence of a fire signature and to initiate action.

Automatic fire detectors include all approved devices designed to detect the presence of a fire and automatically initiate emergency action. These include smoke-sensing fire detectors, heat-sensing fire detectors, flame-sensing fire detectors, gas-sensing fire detectors and fire detectors that operate on other principles as approved by the fire code official. Automatic fire detectors must be selected based on the type and size of fire to be detected and the response required. The automatic fire detector sends a signal to a processing unit to initiate some predetermined action. The processing unit may be internal to the device, as is the case with single-station smoke detectors, or it may be an external unit, as in the case of a fire alarm control unit. Automatic fire detectors must be approved, installed and tested to comply with the code and NFPA 72.

FIRE DOOR. The door component of a fire door assembly.

A fire door is the primary component of a fire door assembly. The fire protection rating assigned to a tested fire door is only valid if the door is installed in a labeled frame with appropriate hardware. Installation requirements are contained in the referenced standard, NFPA 80. Door ratings are expressed in minutes or hours. Field modification of doors are primarily limited to the mounting of listed hardware.

FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY. Any combination of a fire door, frame, hardware and other accessories that together provide a specific degree of fire protection to the opening.

Fire door assemblies, (door, frame and hardware) are required to be tested using the appropriate standard and then installed in accordance with NFPA 80. Side-hinged doors, hardware and frames are often manufactured separately with manufacturers and listing agencies defining acceptable combinations of assembly components that have been tested together.

FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY, FLOOR. See “Floor fire door assembly.”

FIRE EXIT HARDWARE. Panic hardware that is listed for use on fire door assemblies.

Where a door that is required to be of fire-resistance-rated construction also has panic hardware, the hardware is required to be listed for use on the fire door. Fire exit hardware, which is a type of panic hardware, has been tested to function properly where exposed to the effects of a fire (see the definition for "Panic hardware" and Section 1010.2.9).

FIRE LANE. A road or other passageway developed to allow the passage of fire apparatus. A fire lane is not necessarily intended for vehicular traffic other than fire apparatus.

The term “fire lane” is synonymous with the term “fire apparatus access road,” both being a road that provides access from a fire station to a building, or portion thereof. However, it should be noted that the driving surface is not necessarily the same as that provided for a public road. The driving surface must be a surface that can be shown to adequately

===== Page 0111 =====
support the load of anticipated emergency vehicles.

FIRE PARTITION. A vertical assembly of materials designed to restrict the spread of fire in which openings are protected.

Fire partitions are used as wall assemblies to separate adjacent tenant spaces in covered and open mall buildings, to separate dwelling units, to separate sleeping rooms, to enclose corridors and to enclose elevator lobbies. Section 708 establishes the construction requirements for fire partitions. The fire-resistance ratings, continuity requirements and opening protective requirements for fire partitions are usually less restrictive than those for fire barriers.

FIRE PROTECTION RATING. The period of time that an opening protective will maintain the ability to confine a fire as determined by tests specified in Section 716. Ratings are stated in hours or minutes.

The term “fire protection rating” applies to the fire performance of an opening protective, such as a fire door, determined through tests performed in accordance with NFPA 252 or UL 10C.

FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM. Approved devices, equipment and systems or combinations of systems used to detect a fire, activate an alarm, extinguish or control a fire, control or manage smoke and products of a fire or any combination thereof.

A fire protection system is any approved device or equipment, used singly or in combination, manually or automatically, that is intended to detect a fire, notify the building occupants of a fire or suppress the fire. Fire protection systems include fire suppression systems, standpipe systems, fire alarm systems, fire detection systems, smoke control systems and smoke vents. All fire protection systems must be approved by the fire code official and tested in accordance with the referenced standards and Section 901.6.

FIRE PROTECTIVE CURTAIN ASSEMBLY. An assembly consisting of a fabric curtain, a bottom bar, guides, a coil, and an operating and closing system.

Fire protective curtain assemblies are allowed to be used as an opening protective in fire-rated walls and smoke partition, and to protect openings where smoke and draft control assemblies are required. See also the commentary to Section 716.4. Section 404.6 allows the use of a 20-minute fire protective curtain assembly as an alternative to a nonrated glass wall when protected with sprinklers for the enclosure of an atrium. Fire protective curtain assemblies are required to be constructed of any materials or assembly of component materials tested without hose stream in accordance with UL 10D and installed in accordance with NFPA 80.

FIRE RESISTANCE. That property of materials or their assemblies that prevents or retards the passage of excessive heat, hot gases or flames under conditions of use.

All materials offer some degree of fire resistance. A sheet of plywood has a low level of fire resistance as compared to a concrete block. The fire resistance of a material or an assembly is evaluated by testing performed in accordance with ASTM E119. Tested materials will be assigned a fire-resistance rating consistent with the demonstrated performance.

FIRE SAFETY FUNCTIONS. Building and fire control functions that are intended to increase the level of life safety for occupants or to control the spread of harmful effects of fire.

In many cases, automatic fire detectors are installed even in buildings not required to have a fire alarm system. These fire detectors perform specific functions such as releasing door hold-open devices, activating elevator recall, smoke damper activation or air distribution system shutdown (see Section 907.3).

FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE. The distance measured from the building face to one of the following:

1 The closest interior lot line.

2 To the centerline of a street, an alley or public way.

3 To an imaginary line between two buildings on the lot. The distance shall be measured at right angles from the face of the wall.

Fire separation distance is the distance from the exterior wall of the building to one of the three following locations, measured perpendicular to the exterior wall face: an interior lot line [see Commentary Figure 202(20)]; the centerline of a street or public way [see Commentary Figure 202(21)]; or an imaginary line between two buildings on the same property [see Commentary Figure 202(22)]. The imaginary line can be located anywhere between the two buildings; it is the designer's choice, but, once established, the location of the line applies to both buildings and cannot be revised.

The distance can vary with irregular-shaped lots and buildings, as shown in Commentary Figure 202(20) and Figure 202(21). When applying the exterior wall requirements of Table 705.5, the required exterior wall fire-resistance rating might vary along a building.

===== Page 0112 =====
side; for example, where the lot line is not parallel to the exterior wall.

FIRE WALL. A fire-resistance-rated wall having protected openings, which restricts the spread of fire and extends continuously from the foundation to or through the roof, with sufficient structural stability under fire conditions to allow collapse of construction on either side without collapse of the wall.

Fire walls must meet the construction requirements in Section 706. The requirements for fire walls are much more restrictive than fire barriers or fire partitions. The material constituting the fire wall must be noncombustible in all construction types except Type V. The vertical and horizontal continuity requirements are much more restrictive, as are those for the opening protectives. A fire wall, unlike the fire barrier and fire partition, must be constructed so it will remain in place if the construction on either side of it collapses. However, the fire wall is not required to remain in place if construction on both sides of it collapses (i.e., the fire wall is not required to be a free-standing cantilever wall). Fire walls are used to divide a structure into separate buildings (see the definition of "Areas, building"). To be considered separate buildings, the division must be vertical. The code applies the term "fire wall" to vertically constructed assemblies only and not to horizontal assemblies.

FIRE WINDOW ASSEMBLY. A window constructed and glazed to give protection against the passage of fire.

Fire windows are “opening protectives” and contain glazing (see Section 716.3.4). They are required to be tested in accordance with NFPA 257 or UL 9 and are then to be installed in accordance with NFPA 80.

FIREBLOCKING. Building materials, or materials approved for use as fireblocking, installed to resist the free passage of flame to other areas of the building through concealed spaces.

Fireblocking is required to hinder the concealed spread of flame, heat and other products of combustion within hollow spaces inside of walls or floor/ceiling assemblies. This is done by periodically subdividing that space, as indicated in Section 718.2, using construction materials that have some resistance to fire and by sealing the openings around penetrations through those materials. Some fireblocking materials are permitted to be combustible based on the rationale that a substantial combustible material will provide a barrier adequate to perform the intended function (also see Section 718).

FIREPLACE. A hearth and fire chamber or similar prepared place in which a fire may be made and which is built in conjunction with a chimney.

Requirements for masonry fireplaces are contained in Section 2111. Note that a chimney must be provided, as that is the means of conveying the products of combustion to the exterior of the building.

FIREPLACE THROAT. The opening between the top of the firebox and the smoke chamber.

This definition is necessary for proper understanding of the code criteria for location and minimum cross-sectional area. This criterion is based on many years of successful performance and is needed to provide proper construction requirements (see Section 2111.8).

FIRE-RATED GLAZING. Glazing with either a fire protection rating or a fire-resistance rating.

Fire-rated glazing can be of two types—fire-resistance rating or fire protection rating. Fire-resistance-rated glazing is tested to ASTM E119 or UL 263, may be used in walls and is not considered as an opening. Fire-protection-rated glazing is tested to NFPA 257 or UL 9 and is usually in doors or limited-size window openings in fire barriers and fire partitions.

FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING. The period of time a building element, component or assembly maintains the ability to confine a fire, continues to perform a given structural function, or both, as determined by the tests, or the methods based on tests, prescribed in Section 703.

This refers to the period of time a building element, component or assembly maintains the ability to confine a fire, continues to perform a given structural function, or both, as determined by tests or the methods based on tests prescribed in Section 703.

The fire-resistance rating is developed using standardized test methods (e.g., ASTM E119). Assemblies rated under these tests are deemed to be able to perform their function for a specified period of time under specific fire conditions (standard time-temperature curve). The fire-resistance rating is not intended to be a prediction of the actual length of time that an assembly will perform its intended function under actual fire conditions. Although the time-temperature curves of standardized fire test methods are usually selected to approximate at least some real-life fire conditions, the very wide range of actual fire conditions makes the listed fire-resistance rating more of a nominal, comparative index than a predictor of fire-resistance time in any given fire incident.

FIRE-RESISTANT JOINT SYSTEM. An assemblage of specific materials or products that are designed, tested and fire-resistance rated in accordance with either ASTM E1966 or UL 2079 to

===== Page 0113 =====
resist for a prescribed period of time the passage of fire through joints made in or between fire-resistance-rated assemblies.

In order to maintain the fire-resistant integrity of fire-resistance-rated assemblies, joints that occur within an assembly or between adjacent assemblies must be protected through an installation that has been tested in accordance with ASTM E1966 or UL 2079. Some common examples of applications where a fire-resistant joint system would be required are expansion joints in fire-resistance-rated floors or walls and the junction between fire-resistance-rated floors and walls [see Commentary Figure 202(22) for examples]. The regular joints that occur within a uniform assembly are most often tested as part of fire testing (e.g., in accordance with ASTM E119) for that entire assembly. The required details for these joints are specified in the listings for the underlying assembly. These joints do not need additional testing in accordance with ASTM E1966 or UL 2079. Examples of such joints are the joints between individual sheets of gypsum board in a gypsum-sheathed stud wall. Consequently, other than the joints covering or filling the gaps within an assembly, the need for ASTM E1966 or UL 2079 tested joint systems is usually for the joints between dissimilar assemblies or adjacent assemblies.

FIRE-RETARDANT-TREATED WOOD. Wood products that, when impregnated with chemicals by a pressure process or other means during manufacture, exhibit reduced surface-burning characteristics and resist propagation of fire.

The ability of the wood to extinguish itself once the source of ignition is consumed or removed is an important characteristic of this material. Section 2303.2 requires testing in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. The section requires the test to be continued an additional 20 minutes beyond the 10 minutes required to establish the flame spread. According to Section 2303.2, there can be no significant progressive combustion during this period (see the definition of “Preservative-treated wood”).

FIRESTOP, MEMBRANE-PENETRATION. See “Membrane-penetration firestop.”

FIRESTOP, PENETRATION. See “Penetration firestop.”

FIRESTOP SYSTEM, THROUGH-PENETRATION. See “Through-penetration firestop system.”

FIREWORKS. Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect for entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration or detonation that meets the definition of 1.4G fireworks or 1.3G fireworks.

FIREWORKS, 1.3G. Large fireworks devices, which are explosive materials, intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce audible or visible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation. Such 1.3G fireworks include, but are not limited to, firecrackers containing more than 130 milligrams (2 grains) of explosive composition, aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of pyrotechnic composition, and other display pieces which exceed the limits for classification as 1.4G fireworks. Such 1.3G fireworks are also described as fireworks, UN0335 by the DOTn.

FIREWORKS, 1.4G. Small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion or deflagration that complies with the construction, chemical composition and labeling regulations of the DOTn for fireworks, UN0336, and the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) as set forth in CPSC 16 CFR: Parts 1500 and 1507

Any device containing an explosive material that produces an audible or visible effect through combustion, deflagration, detonation or explosion is considered a firework. Fireworks are divided into two categories, 1.4G and 1.3G, based on the amount of pyrotechnic composition present.

The definitions of “Fireworks, 1.3G” and “Fireworks, 1.4G” are derived from the DOTn 49 CFR classification system for transporting explosives, and from NFPA 1124. The amount of pyrotechnic composition is the distinguishing factor between the two types of fireworks (see the commentary to the definition of “Pyrotechnic composition”). Fireworks that contain a limited amount of pyrotechnic composition are classified as 1.4G fireworks. Such fireworks represent a physical hazard (Group H-3), while display fireworks represent a detonation hazard (Group H-1).

The requirements for storage, display and labeling depend on the correct application of the definition of “Fireworks, 1.4G.” This definition reflects the construction, chemical composition and labeling requirements of the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) found in 16 CFR, Parts 1500 and 1507.

FIXED BASE OPERATOR (FBO). A commercial business granted the right by the airport sponsor to operate on an airport and provide aeronautical services, such as fueling, hanging, tie-down and parking, aircraft rental, aircraft maintenance and flight instruction.

Fixed base operator (FBO) is an aviation industry term used to describe a firm that is

===== Page 0114 =====
permanently based at an airport and provides a variety of aircraft services. It is used in conjunction with Section 412.3.6 in the context of determining the appropriate level of fire suppression required in various aircraft hangars at an airport (see commentary, Section 412.3.6).

FIXED SEATING. Furniture or fixture designed and installed for the use of sitting and secured in place including bench-type seats and seats with or without backs or arm rests.

Fixed seating is secured to the floor or is a part of a seating system. Some of the varieties are: bench seating such as in bleachers, which can come with or without back rests; theater seating with arms for each viewer and seats that flip up; lecture halls with individual seats with tablet arms that are fixed or retractable; pew-type seating in courtrooms or booths in a restaurant. To allow appropriate egress from these spaces, the occupant load tables allow for the individual seats to be counted to determine occupant load for the space. Space between the seats (i.e., aisle access-ways) and aisles leading to the exits for these types of seating are addressed in Section 1030. Given their unique issues, bleachers, folding and telescopic seating and grandstands are referenced in ICC 300 in Section 1030.1.1.

FLAME SPREAD. The propagation of flame over a surface.

The rate at which flames travel along the surface of a combustible finish material directly impacts the speed with which a fire spreads within a room or space and is, therefore, regulated by Chapter 8.

FLAME SPREAD INDEX. A comparative measure, expressed as a dimensionless number, derived from visual measurements of the spread of flame versus time for a material tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723.

The ASTM E84 and UL 723 test methods render measurements of surface flame spread (and smoke density) in comparison with test results obtained by using select red oak as a control material. Red oak is used as a control material for furnace calibration because it is a fairly uniform grade of lumber that is readily available nationally, is uniform in thickness and moisture content, and generally gives consistent and reproducible results. The results of this test simply provide a relative understanding of flame spread potential. The flame spread index is sometimes abbreviated as FSI.

FLAMMABLE GAS. A material that is a gas at  \( 20^{\circ} \) C or less at 101.3 kPa of pressure [a material that has a boiling point of  \( 20^{\circ} \) C or less at 101.3 kPa, which also meets one of the following:
1. Is ignitable at 101.3 kPa when in a mixture of 13 percent or less by volume with air; or

2 Has a flammable range at 101.3 kPa with air of at least 12 percent, regardless of the lower limit. The limits specified shall be determined at 101.3 kPa of pressure and a temperature of  \( 20^{\circ} \) C in accordance with ASTM E681.

This term essentially refers to any type of compressed gas that burns in normal concentrations of oxygen in the air (see the definition of “Compressed gas”). The definition is consistent with the provisions of ASTM E681.

FLAMMABLE LIQUEFIED GAS. A liquefied compressed gas which, under a charged pressure, is partially liquid at a temperature of  \( 20^{\circ} \) C and which is flammable.

This term essentially refers to any type of liquefied compressed gas that burns in normal concentrations of oxygen in the air (see the definition of “Compressed gas”).

FLAMMABLE LIQUID. A liquid having a closed cup flash point below  \( 38^{\circ} \) C. Flammable liquids are further categorized into a group known as Class I liquids. The Class I category is subdivided as follows:

CLASS IA. Liquids having a flash point below  \( 25^{\circ} \) C and a boiling point below  \( 40^{\circ} \) C.

CLASS IB. Liquids having a flash point below  \( 25^{\circ} \) C and a boiling point at or above  \( 40^{\circ} \) C.

CLASS IC. Liquids having a flash point at or above  \( 25^{\circ} \) C and below  \( 40^{\circ} \) C. The category of flammable liquids does not include compressed gases or cryogenic fluids, or liquids that do not have a fire point when tested in accordance with ASTM D92.

While all flammable liquids have a closed cup flash point less than  \( 40^{\circ} \) C, the further classification of the Class I liquid is dependent on the boiling point (see the definition of "Boiling point"). The  \( 40^{\circ} \) C flash point limitation for flammable liquids assumes possible indoor ambient temperature conditions of  \( 40^{\circ} \) C.

FLAMMABLE MATERIAL. A material capable of being readily ignited from common sources of heat or at a temperature of  \( 315^{\circ} \) C or less.

Many standardized tests, such as those contained in ASTM E136 and NFPA 701, have been developed to assess the flammability and fire hazards of materials. Both of these test standards include objective criteria for evaluating the combustibility of different materials, however, great care must be taken in conducting and evaluating the results of such tests.

FLAMMABLE SOLID. A solid, other than a blasting agent or explosive, that is capable of causing fire through friction, absorption or

===== Page 0115 =====
moisture, spontaneous chemical change, or retained heat from manufacturing or processing, or which has an ignition temperature below  \( 100^{\circ} \) C or which burns so vigorously and persistently when ignited as to create a serious hazard. A chemical shall be considered a flammable solid as determined in accordance with the test method of CPSC 16 CFR; Part 1500.44, if it ignites and burns with a self-sustained flame at a rate greater than 2.5 mm per second along its major axis.

Flammable solids are combustible materials that ignite easily and burn rapidly. Solids that may cause a fire due to friction are considered flammable solids as are metal powders that can be readily ignited. Examples of flammable solids include nitrocellulose and combustible metals, such as magnesium and titanium. For further discussion of this material definition, see the commentary to it in Chapter 2 of SBC 801.

FLAMMABLE VAPORS OR FUMES. The concentration of flammable constituents in air that exceeds 25 percent of their lower flammable limit (LFL).

Vapors or fumes are considered to be flammable where they exceed 25 percent of their LFL. The LFL of a given vapor in air is the concentration at which flame propagation could occur in the presence of an ignition source (see the definition of "Lower flammable limit").

FLASH POINT. The minimum temperature in degrees centigrade at which a liquid will give off sufficient vapors to form an ignitable mixture with air near the surface or in the container but will not sustain combustion. The flash point of a liquid shall be determined by appropriate test procedure and apparatus as specified in ASTM D56, ASTM D93 or ASTM D3278.

The flash point is the characteristic used in the classification of flammable and combustible liquids. The Tag Closed Tester (ASTM D56), the Pensky-Martens Closed Cup Tester (ASTM D93) and the Small Scale Closed-Cup Apparatus (ASTM D3278) are the referenced test procedures for determining the flash points of liquids. The applicability of the respective test method is dependent on the viscosity of the test liquid and the expected flash point.

FLIGHT. A continuous run of rectangular treads, winders or combination thereof from one landing to another.

Two points of clarification for stairways have been addressed by the definition of "Flight." First, a flight is made up of the treads and risers that occur between landings. Therefore, a stairway connecting two stories that includes an intermediate landing consists of two flights. Secondly, the inclusion of winders within a stairway does not create multiple flights. Winders are simply treads within a flight and are often combined with rectangular treads within the same flight.

## FLOOD DAMAGE-RESISTANT

MATERIALS. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair.

A building or structure located within a flood hazard area will have certain structural and nonstructural elements below the design flood elevation, even where the lowest floor is elevated in compliance with the requirements of Section 1612. To minimize damage and facilitate cleanup, the materials used in those elements are to be resistant to damage by floodwater. In coastal high-hazard areas (commonly called "V zones"), walls that are designed to break away during the design flood may be wetted during floods of lesser magnitude. Where flood damage-resistant materials are used, the owners are not faced with significant repairs. Enclosures below elevated buildings are required to have flood openings that allow floodwater to enter and exit without causing structural damage. To minimize costs and facilitate cleanup, materials used for those enclosures are to resist flood damage. Prolonged contact is generally considered to be partial or total inundation for at least 72 hours. In some instances, materials that are not flood damage-resistant materials, such as wiring for fire alarms and emergency lighting, are allowed below the flood elevation, where specifically required to address life safety and electrical code requirements for parking vehicles, building access and storage areas. For further guidance, refer to FEMA TB #2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas.

FLOOD ELEVATION, DESIGN. See “Design flood elevation.”

FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The greater of the following two areas:

1 The area within a flood plain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year.

2 The area designated as a flood hazard area on a community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated.

FLOOD HAZARD AREAS, SPECIAL. See "Special flood hazard area."

FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from:

1 The overflow of inland or tidal waters.

===== Page 0116 =====
2 The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

The term “flood” is broadly defined because the condition may occur near all types and sizes of bodies of water and in areas with poor surface drainage. Along streams and riverine areas, flooding results from the accumulation of rainfall runoff that drains from upland watersheds. Along coasts and the shorelines of large lakes, flooding is caused by wind-driven surges and waves that push water onshore, often augmented by tidal influences.

FLOODWAY. The channel of the river, creek or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.

FEMA delineates floodways along most rivers and streams that are studied using detailed methods. The floodway is the area that must be kept clear of encroachments, such as fill and buildings, in order to allow a base flood to pass without increasing the water surface more than a designated height. The designated height is found by referencing the floodway data table in the Flood Insurance Study. In general, floodways have faster flow velocities and deeper water than in adjacent floodway fringe areas.

FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The floor area within the inside perimeter of the exterior walls of the building under consideration, exclusive of vent shafts and courts, without deduction for corridors, stairways, ramps, closets, the thickness of interior walls, columns or other features. The floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or floor above. The gross floor area shall not include shafts with no openings or interior courts.

Gross floor area is that area measured within the perimeter formed by the inside surface of the exterior walls. The area of all occupiable and nonoccupiable spaces, including mechanical and elevator shafts, toilet rooms, closets and mechanical equipment rooms, are included in the gross floor area. This area could also include any covered porches, carports or other exterior space intended to be used as part of the building's occupiable space. Both gross and net floor areas are used for the determination of occupant load in accordance with Table 1004.5.

FLOOR AREA, NET. The actual occupied area not including unoccupied accessory areas such as corridors, stairways, ramps, toilet rooms, mechanical rooms and closets.
This area is intended to include only the room areas that are used for specific occupancy purposes and does not include circulation areas, such as corridors, ramps or stairways, or service and utility spaces, such as toilet rooms and mechanical and electrical equipment rooms. Net floor area is typically measured between inside faces of walls within a room. Floor area, net and gross, is utilized in Table 1004.5 to determine occupant load for a space.

FLOOR FIRE DOOR ASSEMBLY. A combination of a fire door, a frame, hardware and other accessories installed in a horizontal plane, which together provide a specific degree of fire protection to a through-opening in a fire-resistance rated floor (see Section 712.1.13.1).

Floor fire door assemblies are required to be tested in accordance with NFPA 288 and are used to protect openings in fire-resistance-rated floors. They are one alternative for protecting a floor opening, such as an access opening to mechanical equipment. See the commentary to Section 712.1.13.1 for additional information on floor fire door assemblies.

FOAM PLASTIC INSULATION. A plastic that is intentionally expanded by the use of a foaming agent to produce a reduced-density plastic containing voids consisting of open or closed cells distributed throughout the plastic for thermal insulating or acoustical purposes and that has a density less than 320 kg per m \( ^{3} \) .

Foam plastic insulation is plastic that is imbedded with gas.

FOAM-EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. A special system discharging a foam made from concentrates, either mechanically or chemically, over the area to be protected.

Foam-extinguishing systems must be of an approved type and installed and tested to comply with NFPA 11, 11A and 16. All foams are intended to exclude oxygen from the fire, cool the area of the fire and insulate adjoining surfaces from heat caused by fires. Foam systems are commonly used to extinguish flammable or combustible liquid fires (see commentary, Section 904.7). While water applied by an automatic sprinkler system can only act horizontally upon the surface that it reaches, foam-extinguishing agents have the ability to act vertically in addition to horizontally. Further, unlike gaseous extinguishing agents, foam does not dissipate rapidly where there is no confined space. Thus, foam systems are also used where there is a need to fill a nonconfined space with extinguishing material as in the case of certain industrial applications.

===== Page 0117 =====
## FOLDING AND TELESCOPIC SEATING.

Tiered seating having an overall shape and size that is capable of being reduced for purposes of moving or storing and is not a building element.

Folding and telescopic seating are typically mounted in gym walls so that they can collapse for the room to be able to be used in multiple configurations.

Bleachers, folding and telescopic seating, and grandstands are essentially unique forms of tiered seating that are supported on a dedicated structural system. All types are addressed in ICC 300, Standard for Bleachers, Folding and Telescopic Seating, and Grandstands (see Section 1030.1.1). Bleachers can have backrests or just seatboards. "Building element" is a defined term that is primarily used in conjunction with the structural elements regulated in Table 601. Bleachers have a separate structural system and are not considered a building element of the building or structure in which they are located. An individual bench seat directly attached to a floor system is not a bleacher. The terms "bleacher" and "grandstand" are basically interchangeable. There is no cutoff in size or number of seats that separates bleachers and grandstands.

FOOD COURT. A public seating area located in the mall/ that serves adjacent food preparation tenant spaces.

Typical mall building layouts include a central gathering area for food and drink consumption. These areas are usually located in the mall itself and chairs are provided for the public's use to consume the food and drink. This public area is usually surrounded by numerous tenant spaces where food is prepared and sold over the counter. A separate design occupant load is required to be calculated in accordance with Section 402.8.2.4.

FOSTER CARE FACILITIES. Facilities that provide care to more than five children, 2-1/2 years of age or less.

Foster care facilities are group homes where children live, and they are not day care facilities. By being under 21/2 years of age, children are assumed not capable of self-preservation, thus there is a need for higher levels of active and passive protection in the building (see the commentary to Group I-2 in Section 308.3). Group homes with children over 21/2 years of age would be classified as Group R-4 or I-1, depending on the number of children housed in the facility. The "more than five children" is intended to clarify that a foster care family would not be considered a Group I-2 facility. See also the definitions for "24-hour basis," "Custodial care," "Group home," "Incapable of self-preservation," and "Personal care service."

FOUNDATION PIER. This definition applies only to Chapter 21.

An isolated vertical foundation member whose horizontal dimension measured at right angles to its thickness does not exceed three times its thickness and whose height is equal to or less than four times its thickness.

This definition is intended specifically for masonry construction. Masonry foundation piers are similar to masonry columns, except that they are shorter and do not need to comply with the prescriptive reinforcement detailing requirements for masonry columns.

FRAME STRUCTURE. A building or other structure in which vertical loads from floors and roofs are primarily supported by columns.

This definition describes the structure types that are covered under Section 1616.2.

FUEL CELL POWER SYSTEM, STATIONARY. A stationary energy-generation system that converts the chemical energy of a fuel and oxidant to electric energy (DC or AC electricity) by an electrochemical process.

Field-fabricated fuel cell power system. A stationary fuel cell power system that is assembled at the job site and is not a preengineered or prepackaged factory-assembled fuel cell power system.

Preengineered fuel cell power system. A stationary fuel cell power system consisting of components and modules that are produced in a factory and shipped to the job site for assembly.

Prepackaged fuel cell power system. A stationary fuel cell power system that is factory assembled as a single, complete unit and shipped as a complete unit for installation at the job site.

This definition is provided for the application of Section 1205 of SBC 801. Fuel cell power systems are being used in ever increasing numbers to meet facility energy needs. Stationary fuel cell power systems generate power through an electrochemical process that combines hydrogen and oxygen to produce electricity. The hydrogen comes from a direct hydrogen source or from any hydrocarbon fuel such as natural gas, gasoline, diesel, or methanol if the fuel cell power system includes integral reforming. The oxygen comes from air around the fuel cell. There are several types that are addressed in more detail in SBC 801 Section 1205. The type of fuel cell will vary the application of the requirements.

GABLE. The triangular portion of a wall beneath the end of a dual-slope, pitched, or mono-slope roof or portion thereof and above the top plates of the

===== Page 0118 =====
story or level of the ceiling below.

This definition contains information relevant to the correct application of sheathing requirements found in Sections 2304 and 2308.

GAS CABINET. A fully enclosed, ventilated noncombustible enclosure used to provide an isolated environment for compressed gas cylinders in storage or use. Doors and access ports for exchanging cylinders and accessing pressure regulating controls are allowed to be included.

Gas cabinets are used to provide adequate control for escaping gas in the event of a leaking cylinder of compressed gases. Gas cabinets are commonly used when dealing with highly toxic and toxic compressed gases. Sections 5003.8.6 and 6004.1.2 of SBC 801 provide additional construction and ventilation requirements for gas cabinets.

GAS DETECTION SYSTEM. A system or portion of a combination system that utilizes one or more stationary sensors to detect the presence of a specified gas at a specified concentration and initiate one or more responses required by this code, such as notifying a responsible person, activating an alarm signal, or activating or deactivating equipment. A self-contained gas detection and alarm device is not classified as a gas detection system.

This term refers to a system that is capable of constantly monitoring the presence of highly toxic or toxic compressed gases at or below the permissible exposure limit (PEL) for the gas. A continuous gas detection system will provide notification of a leak or rupture in a compressed gas cylinder or tank in a storage or use condition. The system can also be designed to turn off equipment related to the high concentration of a gas; or can turn on equipment that, among other actions, could ventilate a space and reduce the harmful concentration.

GAS ROOM. A separately ventilated, fully enclosed room in which only compressed gases and associated equipment and supplies are stored or used.

Gas rooms are used exclusively for the storage or use of hazardous gases in excess of the maximum allowable quantities permitted by Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2). Gas rooms are commonly used as alternative storage areas for HPM gases in Group H-5 facilities.

GASEOUS HYDROGEN SYSTEM. An assembly of piping, devices and apparatus designed to generate, store, contain, distribute or transport a nontoxic, gaseous hydrogen containing mixture having not less than 95-percent hydrogen gas by volume and not more than 1-percent oxygen by volume. Gaseous hydrogen systems consist of items such as compressed gas containers, reactors and appurtenances, including pressure regulators, pressure relief devices, manifolds, pumps, compressors and interconnecting piping and tubing and controls.

This term includes the source of hydrogen and all piping and devices between the source and the equipment being used. The gas in a hydrogen system is above the upper flammable limit (UFL) and is therefore “too rich” to burn. Any leakage, however, can quickly create conditions that will be explosive under ambient conditions.

GLASS FIBERBOARD. Fibrous glass roof insulation consisting of inorganic glass fibers formed into rigid boards using a binder. The board has a top surface faced with asphalt and kraft reinforced with glass fiber.

Depending on the type and location of insulation in walls, floors and roofs, the insulation may impact the fire-resistance rating (see Sections 703.2 and 721.1). Glass fiber insulation is specifically listed in Table 722.6.2(5).

GLASS MAT GYPSUM PANEL. A gypsum panel consisting of a noncombustible core primarily of gypsum, surfaced with glass mat partially or completely embedded in the core.

The glass mat gypsum panel's glass mat-coated facings can provide greater strength, mold and moisture resistance than conventional paper-faced gypsum board.

GRADE (LUMBER). The classification of lumber in regard to strength and utility in accordance with American Softwood Lumber Standard DOC PS 20 and the grading rules of an approved lumber rules-writing agency.

The grade identifies the ability of a particular piece of lumber to resist applied loads. The mark is applied to solid sawn pieces of wood and includes the species, grade and whether it was finished (surfaced) green or dry. The species and grade designations on the grade mark, where used in conjunction with the design value in the NDS, provide all the information necessary to determine what load the piece of lumber is capable of holding. The ALSC provides facsimile sheets for agencies accredited to grade lumber. Although rare, fake grade stamps can be found in the marketplace.

GRADE FLOOR EMERGENCY ESCAPE AND RESCUE OPENING. An emergency escape and rescue opening located such that the bottom of the clear opening is not more than 1100 mm above or below the finished ground level adjacent to the

===== Page 0119 =====
## opening.

Openings used for emergency escape or rescue are clearly easier to use the closer they are to grade. This definition specifies that the maximum sill height above the adjacent exterior grade must be not more than 1100 mm to qualify as a grade floor emergency escape and rescue opening (see Section 1031.3.3).

GRADE PLANE. A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than 1.8 m from the building, between the building and a point 1.8 m) from the building.

This term is used in the definitions of "Basement" and "Story above grade plane." It is critical in determining the height of a building and the number of stories, which are regulated by Chapter 5. Since the finished ground surface adjacent to the building may vary (depending on site conditions), the mean average taken at various points around the building constitutes the grade plane. One method of determining the grade plane elevation is illustrated in Commentary Figure 202(23), where the ground slopes uniformly along the length of each exterior wall.

Where a site has a more complex slope, a more detailed calculation that takes into account the various segments of the perimeter walls must be taken. Commentary Figure 202(24) shows an example of a complex finished grade. A full calculation will show the grade plane to be at an elevation of 154.5 m. where a calculation is done based on just the four extreme corners, grade plane would be thought to be 150.13 m, an error of more than 900 mm.

Situations may arise where the ground adjacent to the building slopes away from the building because of site or landscaping considerations. In this case, the lowest finished ground level at any point between the building's exterior wall and a point 1.8 m from the building [or the lot line, where closer than 1.8 m] comes under consideration. These points are used to determine the elevation of the grade plane as illustrated in Commentary Figure 202(25) and Figure 202(26).

In the context of the code, the term "grade" means the finished ground level at the exterior walls. While the grade plane is a hypothetical horizontal plane derived as indicated above, the grade is that which actually exists or is intended to exist at the completion of site work. The only situation where the grade plane and the grade are identical is where the site is perfectly level for a distance of 1.8 m from all exterior walls.

GRADE PLANE, STORY ABOVE. See “Story above grade plane.”

GRANDSTAND. Tiered seating supported on a dedicated structural system and two or more rows high and is not a building element (see "Bleachers").

Bleachers, folding and telescopic seating, and grandstands are essentially unique forms of tiered seating that are supported on a dedicated structural system. All types are addressed in ICC 300, Standard for Bleachers, Folding and Telescopic Seating, and Grandstands (see Section 1030.1.1). Bleachers can have backrests or just seatboards. "Building element" is a defined term that is primarily used in conjunction with the structural elements regulated in Table 601. Bleachers have a separate structural system and are not considered a building element of the building or structure in which they are located. An individual bench seat directly attached to a floor system is not a bleacher. The terms "bleacher" and "grandstand" are basically interchangeable. There is no cutoff in size or number of seats that separates bleachers and grandstands.

GREENHOUSE. A structure or thermally isolated area of a building that maintains a specialized sunlit environment used for and essential to the cultivation, protection or maintenance of plants.

Buildings made for human habitation maintain specific lighting, ventilation, heating and cooling that is suitable for the health and welfare of humans and their property, even though plants can coexist in such environments. The main distinguishing feature between a greenhouse and other structures is that the environment in a greenhouse is designed and maintained for, and is essential for the propagation of plants used by growers for plant production. However, other activities can be conducted in a greenhouse, such as retail business, research by schools and universities, conservation, education, display by botanical institutions holding documented collections of specialty plants, and similar activities. Most importantly, the unique environment must be carefully controlled for the environment specific to the plants in the greenhouse; otherwise, the plants will not survive. For that reason, this proposed definition only addresses greenhouse structures, and not other spaces such as sunrooms, solariums, glass enclosed walkways, atriums or other types of interior spaces that permit ample sunlight and

===== Page 0120 =====
ventilation so as to prominently feature plants for aesthetic purposes.

GROSS LEASABLE AREA. The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use. The area of tenant occupancy is measured from the centerlines of joint partitions to the outside of the tenant walls. All tenant areas, including areas used for storage, shall be included in calculating gross leasable area.

The gross leasable area represents the aggregate area available in a covered or open mall building for tenant occupancy. It does not include the area of the mall, unless portions of it are leased for the purposes of setting up separate tenant spaces (kiosks). The area is used to determine the design occupant load in accordance with Section 402.8.2.1.

GROUP HOME. A facility for social rehabilitation, substance abuse or mental health problems that contains a group housing arrangement that provides custodial care but does not provide medical care.

The term “group home” is listed under Group I-1 and R-4 occupancies. See the commentary under “Custodial care.” The number of occupants would differentiate which occupancy classification is applicable to the facility. Residents live in a supervised living arrangement. Facilities can be for persons with developmental, emotional, mental or physical difficulties or for persons recovering from drug or alcohol abuse. These facilities are intended to promote recovery, community integration and improved quality of life. While there may be security restrictions, occupants are not restrained (see Section 308.4, Group I-3 for restrained conditions). The focus is to increase an individual’s capacity to be successful in living, working, learning and social environments to the best of their ability. See also the commentary for “24-hour basis,” “Foster care facility,” “Personal care services,” “Custodial care,” “Nursing home” and “Incapable of self-preservation.”

GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.

Guards are sometimes mistakenly referred to as “guardrails.” In actuality, the guard consists of the entire vertical portion of the barrier, not just the top rail (see commentary for “Handrail” and Section 1015). The purpose of guards is to minimize the potential for falls at drop-offs adjacent to walking surfaces. Loading requirements for guards are located in Section 1607.9.
GUEST ROOM. A room used or intended to be used by one or more guests for living or sleeping purposes.

Lodging houses with five or fewer guest rooms are allowed by the code as R-3 occupancies. They are also permitted under SBC 1101/1102. See the definition of “Lodging house” and Section 310.4.

GYPSUM BOARD. The generic name for a family of sheet products consisting of a noncombustible core primarily of gypsum with paper surfacing.

Gypsum board is the most commonly used material for interior wall covering. Gypsum board is also used for exterior sheathing, plaster lath and ceiling covering. Because it is installed in sheet form, it is less labor intensive and generally considered more cost effective than other wall and ceiling materials, such as plaster. Gypsum board requires a minimal amount of finishing and will readily accept paint, wallpaper, vinyl fabric, special textured paint and similar surface finish materials. Gypsum board will be subject to severe failure where placed in direct contact with water or continuous moisture. For this reason, the code does not allow gypsum board to be used in wet areas unless it is provided with a finish material impervious to moisture.

GYPSUM PANEL PRODUCT. The general name for a family of sheet products consisting essentially of gypsum complying with the standards specified in Table 2506.2 and Table 2507.2, and Chapter 35. Gypsum board and glass mat gypsum panels are examples of gypsum panel products.

This definition enables the code user to correctly apply the requirements for these products in Chapter 25. The wording, extracted from ASTM C11, was created by the gypsum manufacturing industry to describe gypsum sheet products that are manufactured either unfaced or with facing other than paper.

GYPSUM PLASTER. A mixture of calcined gypsum or calcined gypsum and lime and aggregate and other approved materials as specified in this code.

Gypsum plaster is available in several forms and is designed for a variety of applications, including those where fire protection of building components, construction of fire-resistance-rated assemblies within the building or control of sound transmission is needed. Gypsum plaster can be applied using a two or three-coat method, depending on the backing or lathing system.

Gypsum plaster provides a hard, smooth finish surface that will readily receive most decorative finishes, such as paint, vinyl wall fabric, wallpaper and textured paint. Various aggregates can be added to the plaster

===== Page 0121 =====
composition to achieve different surface textures, from a smooth towelled to a heavily textured finish.

However, the code does not permit the use of gypsum plaster at exterior locations or at wet areas on the interior of the building.

GYPSUM SHEATHING. Gypsum panel products specifically manufactured with enhanced water resistance for use as a substrate for exterior surface materials.

Gypsum sheathing is typically a special-purpose exterior drywall panel consisting of a moisture-resistant covering.

GYPSUM VENEER PLASTER. Gypsum plaster applied to an approved base in one or more coats normally not exceeding 6.5 mm in total thickness.

Gypsum veneer plaster is specifically designed for use as a one-coat plaster veneer finish surface. Gypsum veneer plaster must be applied over a solid base such as gypsum board lath, gypsum base for veneer plaster, concrete or concrete unit masonry. Although gypsum veneer plaster is designed to be applied in one coat, it can be applied in two coats, as long as the maximum thickness does not exceed 6.5 mm. Gypsum veneer plaster provides a hard, smooth finish surface, much like three-coat gypsum plaster, that will readily receive a variety of decorative finishes. Like gypsum plaster, the code does not permit the use of gypsum veneer plaster at exterior locations or at wet areas on the interior of the building.

GYPSUM WALLBOARD. A gypsum board used primarily as an interior surfacing for building structures.

Gypsum wallboard is typically a flat panel made of gypsum plaster typically sandwiched in between two sheets of thick paper suitable for interior surfacing of building structures.

HABITABLE SPACE. A space in a building for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.

These spaces are normally considered inhabited in the course of residential living and provide the four basic characteristics associated with it: living, sleeping, eating and cooking. All habitable spaces are considered occupiable spaces, though other occupiable spaces, such as halls or utility rooms, are not considered habitable (see the definition of "Occupiable space").

HALOGENATED EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. A fire-extinguishing system using one or more atoms of an element from the halogen chemical series: fluorine, chlorine, bromine and iodine.

Halon is a colorless, odorless gas that inhibits the chemical reaction of fire. Halon extinguishing systems are useful in occupancies such as computer rooms, where an electrically nonconductive medium is essential or desirable and where cleanup of other extinguishing agents presents a problem. The Halon extinguishing system must be of an approved type and installed and tested to comply with NFPA 12A. Halon extinguishing agents have been identified as a source of emissions resulting in the depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer. For this reason, production of new supplies of Halon has been phased out. Alternative gaseous extinguishing agents, such as clean agents, have been developed as alternatives to Halon.

HANDLING. The deliberate transport by any means to a point of storage or use.

The term “handling” pertains to the transport or movement of hazardous materials within a building. Handling presents a level of hazard less than that of use or dispensing operations but greater than storage. Material is handled only when it is transported from one point to another; it is the act of conveyance. Specific handling requirements for various hazardous materials are contained in SBC 801.

HANDRAIL. A horizontal or sloping rail intended for grasping by the hand for guidance or support.

Handrails are provided along walking surfaces that lead from one elevation to another, such as ramps and stairways. Handrails may be any shape in cross section provided that they can be gripped by hand for support and guidance and for checking possible falls on the adjacent walking surface. In addition to being necessary in normal day-to-day use, handrails are especially needed in times of emergency, when the pace of egress travel is hurried and the probability for occupant instability while traveling along the sloped or stepped walking surface is greater. Handrails, by themselves, are not intended to be used in place of guards to limit falls at drop-offs. Where guards and handrails are used together, the handrail is a separate element typically attached to the inside surface of the guard. The top guard cannot be used as a required handrail, except within dwelling units and limited areas in assembly seating (see Section 1014). See the commentary to the definition of "Guard." For loading on handrails, see Section 1607.9.

HARDBOARD. A fibrous-felted, homogeneous panel made from lignocellulosic fibers consolidated under heat and pressure in a hot press to a density not less than 500 kg per cubic meter.

===== Page 0122 =====
Hardboard is used for various interior applications, as well as siding applications. Other ingredients may be added during processing to provide or improve properties, such as strength, water resistance and general utility.

HARDWARE. See “Fire exit hardware” and “Panic hardware.”

HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Those chemicals or substances that are physical hazards or health hazards as classified in Section 307 and SBC 801, whether the materials are in usable or waste condition.

The term “hazardous materials” refers to those materials that present either a physical or health hazard. A specific listing of hazardous materials is indicated in Sections 307.3, 307.4, 307.5 and 307.6. An occupancy containing greater than the maximum allowable quantities per control area of these materials as indicated in Table 307.1(1) or Table 307.1(2) is classified in one of the four high-hazard occupancy classifications. Section 307.1.1 provides 17 instances where, under specific conditions of handling, use, storage or packaging, the presence of one or more hazardous substances does not result in an occupancy being classified one of the Group H occupancies.

## HAZARDOUS PRODUCTION

MATERIAL (HPM). A solid, liquid or gas associated with semiconductor manufacturing that has a degree-of-hazard rating in health, flammability or instability of Class 3 or 4 as ranked by NFPA 704 and which is used directly in research, laboratory or production processes which have as their end product materials that are not hazardous.

This definition identifies those specific materials that can be contained within an HPM facility. The restriction in the definition for only hazardous materials with a Class 3 or 4 rating is not intended to exclude materials that are less hazardous, but to clarify that materials of the indicated higher ranking are still permitted in an HPM facility without classifying the building as Group H. NFPA 704 is referenced in order to establish the degree of hazard ratings for all materials as related to health, flammability and instability risks.

HEAD JOINT. Vertical mortar joint placed between masonry units within the wythe at the time the masonry units are laid.

☑ Vertically oriented joints between masonry units are head joints [see Commentary Figure 202(8)].

HEALTH HAZARD. A classification of a chemical for which there is statistically significant evidence that acute or chronic health effects are capable of occurring in exposed persons. The term "health hazard" includes chemicals that are toxic or highly toxic, and corrosive.

Materials that present risks to people from handling or exposure are considered health hazards. Examples of these types of materials are indicated in Section 307.6. Buildings and structures containing materials that present a health hazard in excess of the maximum allowable quantities would be classified as Group H-4. Materials that present a health hazard may also present a physical hazard (see the definition of "Physical hazard") and must comply with the requirements of the code applicable to both hazards.

HEAT DETECTOR. See “Detector, heat.”

HEIGHT, BUILDING. The vertical distance from grade plane to the average height of the highest roof surface.

This definition establishes the two points of measurement that determine the height of a building. This measurement is used to determine compliance with the building height limitations of Sections 503.1 and 504 and Table 504.3 and Table 504.4, which limit building height both in terms of the number of stories and the number of meters between the two points of measurement.

The lower point of measurement is the grade plane (see the definition of "Grade plane"). The upper point of measurement is the roof surface of the building, with consideration given to sloped roofs (such as a hip or gable roof). In the case of sloped roofs, the average height would be used as the upper point of measurement, rather than the eave line or the ridge line. The average height of the roof is the mid-height between the roof eave and the roof ridge, regardless of the shape of the roof.

This definition also indicates that building height is measured to the highest roof surface. In the case of a building with multiple roof levels, the highest of the various roof levels must be used to determine the building height. Where the highest of the various roof levels is a sloped roof, then the average height of that sloped roof must be used. The average height of multiple roof levels is not to be used to determine the building height. Where structures are divided into multiple buildings by fire walls, building height is determinable for each building separately.

The distance that a building extends above ground also determines the relative hazards of that building. Simply stated, a taller building presents relatively greater safety hazards than a shorter building for several reasons, including

===== Page 0123 =====
fire service access and time for occupant egress. The code specifically defines how building height is measured to enable various code requirements, such as type of construction and fire suppression, to be consistent with those relative hazards [see Commentary Figure 202(27) for the computation of building height in terms of meters and stories].

The term “height” is also used frequently in the code for other limitations related to, and sometimes not related to, “building height.” For example, Section 1511 limits the height of a penthouse above the top of the roof. Since a “penthouse” is defined as a structure that is built above the roof of a building, it is above the point to which building height is measured. Therefore, a penthouse would not affect the measurement of building height and can be located above the maximum allowed roof height, provided it complies with the limitations of Section 1511. Other provisions, such as Section 1013, specify requirements based on height, but such height is usually measured from a location other than grade plane and is not intended to be building height.

HELICAL PILE. Manufactured steel deep foundation element consisting of a central shaft and one or more helical bearing plates. A helical pile is installed by rotating it into the ground. Each helical bearing plate is formed into a screw thread with a uniform defined pitch.

This definition clarifies a term that refers to a specific type of deep foundation element (see the design requirements in SBC 303).

HELIPAD. A structural surface that is used for the landing, taking off, taxiing and parking of helicopters.

This definition provides a specific term that refers to the portion of a structure that is subject to the helicopter live loads in Section 1607.6.

HELIPORT. An area of land or water or a structural surface that is used, or intended for use, for the landing and taking off of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas that are used, or intended for use, for heliport buildings or other heliport facilities.

A heliport includes not only the immediate landing and take-off pad, but also all other adjacent service areas. The fueling, maintenance, repairs or storage of helicopters may be done within or outside of a building or structure. These outside areas or enclosed spaces are considered as part of the heliport.

HELISTOP. The same as “heliport,” except that no fueling, defueling, maintenance, repairs or storage of helicopters is permitted.
A helistop, by definition, is limited only to the immediate landing and take-off pad. Examples of helistops would be the pad located on top of a hospital for the unloading of emergency room patients, a pad for discharging commuters outside of an office building or the pad used to load and unload tourists at a sightseeing attraction.

HIGHER EDUCATION LABORATORY. Laboratories in Group B occupancies used for educational purposes above the high school. Storage, use and handling of chemicals in such laboratories shall be limited to purposes related to testing, analysis, teaching, research or developmental activities on a nonproduction basis.

This definition sets the scope of the provisions in Section 428 for laboratories. This section and Chapter 38 of SBC 801 provide requirements that are customized to address the needs of university laboratories including laboratory suites and special allowances for existing laboratories. Without the concept of laboratory suites, such labs would be classified as Group H. The provisions in SBC 201 are limited to laboratory suites for new construction. See the commentary to Chapter 38 of SBC 801.

HIGHLY TOXIC. A material which produces a lethal dose or lethal concentration that falls within any of the following categories:

1 A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of 50 milligrams or less per kilogram of body weight when administered orally to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each.

2 A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of 200 milligrams or less per kilogram of body weight when administered by continuous contact for 24 hours (or less if death occurs within 24 hours) with the bare skin of albino rabbits weighing between 2 and 3 kilograms each.

3 A chemical that has a median lethal concentration (LC50) in air of 200 parts per million by volume or less of gas or vapor, or 2 milligrams per liter or less of mist, fume or dust, when administered by continuous inhalation for 1 hour (or less if death occurs within 1 hour) to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each.

Mixtures of these materials with ordinary materials, such as water, might not warrant classification as highly toxic. While this system is basically simple in application, any hazard evaluation that is required for the precise categorization of this type of material shall be performed by experienced,

===== Page 0124 =====
technically competent persons.

This definition is derived from DOL 29 CFR, Part 1910.1200. These materials are considered dangerous to humans when inhaled, absorbed or injected through the skin, or ingested orally. Highly toxic materials present a health hazard and are subsequently listed as Group H-4 in Section 307.6. Examples of highly toxic materials include gases such as arsenic, fluorine and hydrogen cyanide, liquid acrylic acid and calcium cyanide in solid form. Mixtures of these materials with ordinary materials, such as water, might not warrant a highly toxic classification. While this system is basically simple in application, any hazard evaluation that is required for the precise categorization of this type of material is to be performed by experienced, technically competent persons. For further discussion of this material definition, see the commentary to Chapter 2 of SBC 801.

## HIGH-PRESSURE DECORATIVE

EXTERIOR-GRADE COMPACT LAMINATE (HPL). Panels consisting of layers of cellulose fibrous material impregnated with thermosetting resins and bonded together by a high-pressure process to form a homogeneous nonporous core suitable for exterior use.

HPL is an exterior finish material. While in common use in Europe, HPL is finding expanded use elsewhere. The definition is based on the International Standard EN 428. Section 1408 specifies the requirements and uses for HPL.

## HIGH-PRESSURE DECORATIVE

EXTERIOR-GRADE COMPACT LAMINATE (HPL) SYSTEM. An exterior wall covering fabricated using HPL in a specific assembly including joints, seams, attachments, substrate, framing and other details as appropriate to a particular design.

HPL systems are intended for exterior application for buildings. The definition is based on the International Standard EN 428. Section 1408 specifies the requirements and uses for HPL systems.

HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor located more than 23 m above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.

Determining what qualifies as a high-rise building is a fairly unique measurement of height and is not based on the definition of "Building height." The critical measurement is from the lowest ground location where a fire department will be able to set its fire-fighting equipment to a floor level of occupied floors as shown in Commentary Figure 202(28). It is not a measurement from grade plane to top of the building. The basis of the measurement is analyzing the capability of fighting a fire and rescuing occupants from the outside the building. Once past a height of 23 m above ground level, ground-based firefighting will not be sufficient. High-rise buildings must comply with the requirements of Section 403. High-rise buildings with floors higher than 36 m and higher than 126 m are subject to additional regulations and elevator requirements. Certain buildings such as aircraft control towers are exempt from Section 403, but similar provisions apply in each case.

HISTORIC BUILDINGS. Any building or structure that is one or more of the following:

1 Listed or certified as eligible for listing by the State Historic Preservation Officer or the Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places, in the National Register of Historic Places.

2 Designated as historic under an applicable law.

3 Certified as a contributing resource within a National Register, state designated or locally designated historic district.

Buildings technically considered historic must be designated as such through a governmental law. In addition, there are buildings that have been reviewed for eligibility to be listed as a national historic building. Those listed as eligible for national listing also are considered historic for the purposes of the code. Buildings that are within a historic district are not necessarily, themselves, historic buildings. The determination of their designation as historic would depend on the specifics of the listing of the historic area. SBC 901 provides specific provisions applying to historic buildings.

HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLY. A fire-resistance-rated floor or roof assembly of materials designed to restrict the spread of fire in which continuity is maintained.

A horizontal assembly is a component for completing compartmentation. Horizontal assemblies have all openings and penetrations protected equal to the rating for the fire-resistance-rated floor or roof assembly [see Commentary Figure 202(29)].

HORIZONTAL EXIT. An exit component consisting of fire-resistance-rated construction and opening protectives intended to compartmentalize portions of a building thereby creating refuge areas that afford safety from the fire and smoke from the area of fire origin.

This term refers to a fire-resistance-rated wall that subdivides a structure into multiple compartments and provides an effective barrier to protect occupants from a fire condition within

===== Page 0125 =====
one of the compartments. After occupants pass through a horizontal exit, they must be provided not only with sufficient space to gather but also with access to another exit, such as an exterior door or exit stairway, through which they can exit the building. Commentary Figure 202(30) depicts the exits serving a single building that is subdivided with a fire-resistance-rated wall (see Section 1026).

## HOSPITALS AND

HOSPITALS. Facilities that provide care or treatment for the medical, psychiatric, obstetrical, or surgical treatment of care recipients who are incapable of self-preservation.

Persons in hospital facilities may be physically incapable of self-preservation, or at least extremely limited in their ability to evacuate. In psychiatric hospitals, they may be confined within an area of a building for care or security purposes. In consideration of an occupant's health and safety, hospitals and nursing homes at least partially rely on defend-in-place strategies. See the commentaries to Sections 308 and 407.

Care facilities are used by care recipients of varying acuity seeking a broad spectrum of available support services. These facilities span a wide range of occupancy types, including Groups E, I and R. The level of care provided is based on the condition and capabilities of an occupant, which, in turn, indicate appropriate standards for protection systems, both passive and active. See also the definitions for "24-hour basis," "Care suite," "Custodial care," "Detoxification facilities," "Incapable of self-preservation," "Medical care" and "Nursing homes."

## HOUSING UNIT. A dormitory or a group of cells with a common dayroom in Group I-3.

A housing unit is a key delineation of space within a Group I-3 occupancy. Often inmates are restricted to their housing unit and not allowed to move freely outside of the unit. A housing unit can include more than one tier of cells. Because a housing unit is often designed as a multiple-level area with a shared day room, it will typically share a common atmosphere (see Section 408.5 for the protection of vertical openings). See also the commentaries for "Cell" and "Cell tier."

HPM. See “Hazardous Production Material.”

HPM ROOM. A room used in conjunction with or serving a Group H-5 occupancy, where HPM is stored or used and which is classified as a Group H-2, H-3 or H-4 occupancy.

An HPM room in a Group H-5 facility is utilized for the storage and use of hazardous production materials in excess of the maximum allowable quantities permitted in Table 307.1(1) or Table 307.1(2). The rooms are, therefore, considered a Group H-2, H-3 or H-4 occupancy depending on the type of hazardous material.

HYDROGEN FUEL GAS ROOM. A room or space that is intended exclusively to house a gaseous hydrogen system.

This term refers to an enclosed space used exclusively for a gaseous hydrogen system that requires construction and protection unique to the hazards associated with this use. The room itself may be considered as an incidental accessory occupancy or a Group H occupancy, depending on the amount of hydrogen in such rooms. The definition itself should not be interpreted to prevent hydrogen piping systems from serving distributed hydrogen-using equipment and appliances located elsewhere on site or in the building. However, the amount of hydrogen within such piping needs to be evaluated with respect to the maximum allowable quantities in Table 307.1(1).

IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS TO LIFE AND HEALTH (IDLH). The concentration of airborne contaminants which poses a threat of death, immediate or delayed permanent adverse health effects, or effects that could prevent escape from such an environment. This contaminant concentration level is established by the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) based on both toxicity and flammability. It generally is expressed in parts per million by volume (ppm/v) or milligrams per cubic meter (mg per m³). If adequate data do not exist for precise establishment of IDLH concentrations, an independent certified industrial hygienist, industrial toxicologist, appropriate regulatory agency or other source approved by the building official shall make such determination.

The definition of “immediately dangerous to life and health (IDLH)” is the minimum concentration of an air-borne contaminant, such as a highly toxic compressed gas, that a person could be exposed to before the risk of permanent adverse side effects. IDLH is important in determining the design of treatment systems for highly toxic or toxic compressed gases.

IMPACT LOAD. The load resulting from moving machinery, elevators, craneways, vehicles and other similar forces and kinetic loads, pressure and possible surcharge from fixed or moving loads.

This definition identifies the scope of the type of loading addressed in Section 1607.10. The effect of impact loads on a structure can be significantly higher than the weight of the

===== Page 0126 =====
impacting elements because of their movement or vibration.

IMPACT PROTECTIVE SYSTEM. Construction that has been shown by testing to withstand the impact of test missiles and that is applied, attached or locked over exterior glazing.

These systems resist windborne debris during a hurricane or other high-wind event. Impact protective systems are important components of the building envelope and their performance is critical to maintaining the overall structural integrity of the building.

INCAPABLE OF SELF-PRESERVATION. Persons who, because of age, physical limitations, mental limitations, chemical dependency or medical treatment, cannot respond as an individual to an emergency situation.

Care recipients/residents of nursing homes and hospitals may be in situations where they are unable to self-evacuate due to physical limitations arising from, for example, medication, surgery, injury or connection to medical equipment.

Care facilities are used by care recipients of varying acuity seeking a broad spectrum of available support services. These facilities span a wide range of occupancy types, including Groups E, I and R. There are three types of care defined in the codes: personal, custodial and medical. The level of care provided is based on the condition and capabilities of an occupant, which, in turn, indicate appropriate standards for protection systems, both active and passive. See also the definitions for "24-hour basis," "Custodial care," "Detoxification facilities," "Foster care facilities," "Group home," "Hospitals and psychiatric hospitals," "Medical care," "Nursing homes" and "Personal care service."

INCOMPATIBLE MATERIALS. Materials that, when mixed, have the potential to react in a manner that generates heat, fumes, gases or byproducts which are hazardous to life or property.

These materials, whether in storage or in use, constitute a dangerous chemical combination. Determination of which chemicals in combination present a hazard is a difficult situation for the building official. Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) alone may not provide all of the necessary information. When in doubt, the building official should seek additional information from the manufacturer of the chemicals involved, the building owner or from experts who are knowledgeable in industrial hygiene or chemistry.

INDIVIDUAL TRUSS MEMBER. A truss chord or truss web.

In the truss, the bottom chord and the top chord carry tension and compression, fulfilling the same function as the flanges of an I-beam. The internal members of the truss are called web members. They help connect the top and bottom chords and help distribute the forces on the top and bottom chords and/or providing bracing against buckling of other members of the truss. See Commentary Figure 202(31).

INERT GAS. A gas that is capable of reacting with other materials only under abnormal conditions such as high temperatures, pressures and similar extrinsic physical forces. Within the context of the code, inert gases do not exhibit either physical or health hazard properties as defined (other than acting as a simple asphyxiant) or hazard properties other than those of a compressed gas. Some of the more common inert gases include argon, helium, krypton, neon, nitrogen and xenon.

Inert gases do not react readily with other materials under normal temperature and pressure (NTP), but it is possible for a reaction to occur. For example, even nitrogen combines with some of the more active metals such as lithium and magnesium to form nitrides, and at high temperatures it will also combine with oxygen and other elements. The formation of compounds utilizing inert gases is also possible. Xenon combines with fluorine to form various fluorides, and with oxygen to form oxides. The compounds formed are crystalline solids. As indicated in Table 307.1(1), there are no maximum allowable quantities specified for inert gases. As such, inert gases are not regulated by the code as hazardous materials with respect to a potential Group H occupancy classification.

INITIATING DEVICE. A system component that originates transmission of a change-of-state condition, such as in a smoke detector, manual fire alarm box or supervisory switch.

All fire protection systems consist of devices, that upon use or actuation will initiate the intended operation. A manual fire alarm box, for example, upon actuation will transmit a fire alarm signal. In the case of a single-station device, the initiating device and the notification appliance are one and the same.

INSULATING SHEATHING. A rigid panel or board insulation material having a thermal resistance of not less than R-2 of the core material with properties suitable for use on walls, floors, roofs or foundations.

Insulating sheathing has a minimum thermal resistance and is typically used as part of a continuous insulation on exterior walls. See also the commentary to Sections 1403 and 1404.

INTENDED TO BE OCCUPIED AS A RESIDENCE. This refers to a dwelling unit or

===== Page 0127 =====
sleeping unit that can or will be used all or part of the time as the occupant's place of abode.

A unit that is a person's home, rather than a unit used for a more transient nature, is a place of abode. Fair housing regulations do not include a 30-day criterion for transient/nontransient, similar to what has been traditionally used by the building codes (see the commentary to Section 1107 for additional information); therefore, beach homes, timeshares and extended-stay hotels may be included.

INTERIOR EXIT RAMP. An exit component that serves to meet one or more means of egress design requirements, such as required number of exits or exit access travel distance, and provides for a protected path of egress travel to the exit discharge or public way.

To qualify as an interior exit ramp, the ramp must be enclosed with a fire-rated enclosure in order to provide a protected path between the exit access and exit discharge. This enclosure must extend directly to the exterior at grade; extend through an exit passageway to grade; or comply with one of the allowances for exit discharge through a lobby, vestibule or horizontal exit. Travel distance is measured to the entrance to the enclosure for the interior exit ramp. Ramps that are utilized by occupants for evacuation but do not meet the provisions for exits are considered exit access elements (see "Exit access ramp"). For exterior exit ramp requirements, see Section 1027.

INTERIOR EXIT STAIRWAY. An exit component that serves to meet one or more means of egress design requirements, such as required number of exits or exit access travel distance, and provides for a protected path of egress travel to the exit discharge or public way.

To qualify as an interior exit stairway, the stairway must be enclosed with a fire-rated enclosure in order to provide a protected path between the exit access and exit discharge. This enclosure must extend directly to the exterior at grade; extend through an exit passageway to grade; or comply with one of the allowances for exit discharge through a lobby, vestibule or horizontal exit. Travel distance is measured to the entrance to the enclosure for the interior exit stairway. Stairways that are utilized by occupants for evacuation but do not meet the provisions for exits are considered exit access elements (see "Exit access stairway"). For exterior exit stairway requirements, see Section 1027.

INTERIOR FINISH. Interior finish includes interior wall and ceiling finish and interior floor finish.
This is a general term that addresses all exposed surfaces, which includes walls, ceilings and floors. Interior finish material is exposed to the interior space enclosed by these building elements.

INTERIOR FLOOR FINISH. The exposed floor surfaces of buildings including coverings applied over a finished floor or stair, including risers.

This definition clarifies which part of the interior finish is considered the floor. Floors are treated differently than walls and ceilings as they pose a minimal fire hazard in comparison to that potentially created by the interior finish on walls and ceilings (see commentary, Section 804). Materials that are installed above the structural floor element and exposed to the room or space are considered floor finish materials. Such materials are, therefore, subject to the requirements of Section 804. This section also restricts the combustibility and ability to propagate a fire based on radiant exposure levels.

INTERIOR FLOOR-WALL BASE. Interior floor finish trim used to provide a functional or decorative border at the intersection of walls and floors.

This definition, which addresses interior floor-wall base trim materials, provides an understanding and clarification of these types of products versus other interior trim materials. In many cases, floor-covering material is just seamlessly turned up or used at the intersection of the floor and the wall, thus becoming the floor-wall base trim. Because of their location at the floor line, floor-wall base materials are not likely to be involved in a fire until the floor covering is also involved, usually at room flashover (see also commentary, Section 806.6).

INTERIOR SURFACES. Surfaces other than weather exposed surfaces.

Interior surfaces are all surfaces, exposed and unexposed to view, on the inside of a building or structure that are not subject to damage or failure of their intended purpose because of the effects of uncontrollable weather conditions, such as rain and wind. Interior surfaces are generally exposed to mechanically controlled climatic conditions through air-conditioning, heating and humidity control. Because of these controls, interior surfaces require far fewer restrictions than exterior surfaces. Therefore, the quantities and types of materials and finishes permitted for use on interior surfaces are greatly increased.

INTERIOR WALL AND CEILING FINISH. The exposed interior surfaces of buildings, including but not limited to: fixed or movable walls and partitions; toilet room privacy partitions;

===== Page 0128 =====
columns; ceilings; and interior wainscoting, paneling or other finish applied structurally or for decoration, acoustical correction, surface insulation, structural fire resistance or similar purposes, but not including trim.

A material that is applied to ceilings as well as walls, columns, partitions (including the privacy partitions in bathrooms that could pose a significant threat in larger bathrooms where unrated) and other vertical interior surfaces whether fixed or movable. The application of this material may be for structural, decorative, acoustical, structural fire resistance and other similar reasons. Trim, such as baseboard, door or window casing, is not considered interior wall and ceiling finish. Interior wall and ceiling finish is regulated by Section 803.

INTERLAYMENT. A layer of felt or nonbituminous saturated felt not less than 450 mm wide, shingled between each course of a wood-shake roof covering.

According to Section 1507.9.5, interlayment is required to comply with ASTM D226, Type I, which is commonly referred to as No. 15 asphalt felt.

INTERMODAL SHIPPING CONTAINER. A six-sided steel unit originally constructed as a general cargo container used for the transport of goods and materials.

Cargo containers are being repurposed for multiple types of building uses. See the commentary to Section 3115 for additional information and requirements.

INTUMESCENT FIRE-RESISTANT

COATINGS. Thin film liquid mixture applied to substrates by brush, roller, spray or trowel which expands into a protective foamed layer to provide fire-resistant protection of the substrates when exposed to flame or intense heat.

Section 1705.15 requires special inspections for intumescent fire-resistant coatings in accordance with AWCI 12-B, based on the fire-resistance design. Because AWCI 12-B does not define or describe these materials, this definition facilitates correct application of the special inspections.

JOINT. The opening in or between adjacent assemblies that is created due to building tolerances or is designed to allow independent movement of the building in any plane caused by thermal, seismic, wind or any other loading.

This term defines the void created where two assemblies meet and an open space occurs between the assemblies [see Commentary Figure 202(19) for examples of building joints].

JURISDICTION. The governmental unit that has adopted this code.
The governmental unit such as a town, township, county that has the legal authority under state statutes to adopt a building code.

L RATING. The air leakage rating of a through penetration firestop system or a fire-resistant joint system when tested in accordance with UL 1479 or UL 2079, respectively.

The term “L rating” is a companion rating similar to F ratings and T ratings. The term is already widely used in the industry. Air leakage for breaches of smoke barriers can be limited by adherence to the requirements in Section 714.4. Only through-penetrations and joints in smoke barriers are required to meet the limits on air leakage.

LABEL. An identification applied on a product by the manufacturer that contains the name of the manufacturer, the function and performance characteristics of the product or material and the name and identification of an approved agency, and that indicates that the representative sample of the product or material has been tested and evaluated by an approved agency (see Section 1703.5, "Manufacturer's designation" and "Mark").

A label provides verification of testing and inspection of materials, products or assemblies (see commentary Section 1703.5). See also the commentary for definitions of “Listed,” “Mark,” “Labeled” and “Manufacturer’s designation.”

LABELED. Equipment, materials or products to which has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, approved agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.

The term is an adjective applied to equipment, materials and products that have been tested or otherwise determined to meet the intended purpose or meet a standard. The label is that of a laboratory or other agency qualified to do the evaluations (see commentary, Section 1703.5). See also the commentary for definitions of "Listed," "Mark," "Label" and "Manufacturer's designation."

LABORATORY SUITE. A fire-rated, enclosed laboratory area providing one or more laboratory spaces within a Group B educational occupancy that includes ancillary uses such as offices, bathrooms and corridors that are contiguous with the laboratory area and are constructed in accordance with Section 428.

===== Page 0129 =====
This concept, detailed in Section 428, is similar to that of control areas, but is specific to the needs of one or more laboratories and related facilities sharing a single control area. Laboratories in such arrangements often easily exceed MAQs. This concept allows such amounts to be broken into several separated and protected spaces.

LEVEL OF EXIT DISCHARGE. See “Exit discharge, level of.”

LIFE SAFETY SYSTEMS. Systems, devices and equipment that enhance or facilitate evacuation, smoke control, compartmentation and isolation.

Life safety systems are installed in a building for the purpose of the protection and preservation of human life during an emergency or failure of a critical building system. These include architectural designs that provide egress and protected areas within buildings by layout and construction type as well as mechanical and electrical systems that perform a specific function. Some examples of life safety systems are: fire alarm and detection systems, emergency alarm systems, smoke control systems, mass notification systems, and emergency and exit lighting.

LIGHT-DIFFUSING SYSTEM. Construction consisting in whole or in part of lenses, panels, grids or baffles made with light-transmitting plastics positioned below independently mounted electrical light sources, skylights or light-transmitting plastic roof panels. Lenses, panels, grids and baffles that are part of an electrical fixture shall not be considered as a light-diffusing system.

Heat-resistant plastics, such as polystyrene and urea, are frequently used for light diffusion.

LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION. Construction whose vertical and horizontal structural elements are primarily formed by a system of repetitive wood or cold-formed steel framing members.

The code uses the term “light frame” to distinguish this unique type of framing system from other structural systems. The structural integrity of light-frame construction is dependent upon numerous connections or frequent bracing. Other framing systems or terms commonly used in the building industry that are considered as light-frame construction include: “stick built,” “platform frame,” “western frame” and “balloon frame.” Section 2211 pertains to light-frame coldformed steel construction. Section 2308 defines a specific subcategory of light-frame construction called “conventional light-frame construction,” which is limited to wood materials.

LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC ROOF PANELS. Structural plastic panels other than skylights that are fastened to structural members, or panels or sheathing and that are used as light-transmitting media in the plane of the roof.

Plastic roof panels are primarily used in areas where light transmission rather than visual clarity is the goal (e.g., factory and industrial applications). Even though they are used as light-transmitting media, they must support the loads and forces encountered, just like roof surfaces. Typical applications include factories, warehouses and greenhouses where glass breakage is a practical concern.

LIGHT-TRANSMITTING PLASTIC WALL PANELS. Plastic materials that are fastened to structural members, or to structural panels or sheathing, and that are used as light-transmitting media in exterior walls.

This term is only applicable to plastic wall panels allowing the transmission of light. Even though they are used as light-transmitting media, they must support the loads and forces encountered, just like other wall surfaces. Foam core insulated panels are regulated by Section 2603 and are not considered plastic wall panels.

LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION. Line shown on FIRMs to indicate the inland limit of the 450 mm breaking wave height during the base flood.

FEMA shows a Limit of Moderate Wave Action line to delineate the inland extent of the Coastal A Zone (see commentary for Coastal A Zone), where this line is on the FIRM, then the code, by reference to SBC 301 and ASCE 24, imposes requirements that apply in areas with wave action.

LIMIT STATE. A condition beyond which a structure or member becomes unfit for service and is judged to be no longer useful for its intended function (serviceability limit state) or to be unsafe (strength limit state).

This definition is needed for a clear understanding of the load and resistance factor design (LRFD) methodology.

LIQUID. A material that has a melting point that is equal to or less than  \( 20^{\circ} \) C and a boiling point that is greater than  \( 20^{\circ} \) C at 101.3 kPa. When not otherwise identified, the term “liquid” includes both flammable and combustible liquids.

This definition specifies the criteria to establish when material is considered a liquid based on its melting and boiling points. Where the term “liquid” is referred to, it is intended to include both flammable and combustible liquids.

LIQUID STORAGE ROOM. A room classified as a Group H-3 occupancy used for the storage of flammable or combustible liquids in a closed condition.

===== Page 0130 =====
Liquid storage rooms are utilized exclusively for the storage of flammable and combustible liquids in closed containers in excess of the maximum allowable quantities permitted by Table 307.1(1) and Table 307.1(2). The storage room itself is considered a Group H-3 occupancy in accordance with Section 307.5.

LIQUID USE, DISPENSING AND MIXING ROOM. A room in which Class I, II and IIIA flammable or combustible liquids are used, dispensed or mixed in open containers.

This term refers to all nonstorage rooms utilized exclusively for flammable and combustible liquids other than Class IIIB liquids. Class IIIB liquids have a flash point in excess of  \( 95^{\circ} \) C and are not considered hazardous.

LISTED. Equipment, materials, products or services included in a list published by an organization acceptable to the building official and concerned with evaluation of products or services that maintains periodic inspection of production of listed equipment or materials or periodic evaluation of services and whose listing states either that the equipment, material, product or service meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.

When a product is listed and labeled, it indicates that it has been tested for conformance to an applicable standard and is subject to a third-party inspection quality assurance (QA) program. The QA verifies that the minimum level of quality required by the appropriate standard is maintained. Labeling provides a readily available source of information that is useful for field inspection of installed products. The label identifies the product or material and provides other information that can be further investigated if there is any question as to its suitability for the specific installation. The labeling agency performing the third-party inspection must be approved by the building official, and the basis for this approval may include, but is not limited to, the capacity and capability of the agency to perform the specific testing and inspection. See also the commentary for definitions of "Mark," "Label," "Labeled" and "Manufacturer's designation."

The question is often asked whether the listing of a product can be voided or violated. The use of a listing mark applied to a product is authorized by the listing agency and is a "statement" by the product manufacturer that the product, as manufactured, met all appropriate requirements (such as the criteria contained in a test standard) at the time of manufacture and shipment to a point-of-use or point-of-sale. After that point in time, any alteration or modification makes it impossible for the building official or the listing agency to determine if the product continues to meet the criteria by which its listing was originally attained. Listed products are subject to the review and approval of the building official. Where the building official determines that a field modification or alteration to the product is significant enough to call its impact on the listing into question, an evaluation in the field by representatives of the listing agency may be required in order to verify the continued compliance of the product with the original listing criteria. Such field evaluations or tests would be the responsibility of the permit holder and conducted at no cost to the jurisdiction (see Section 104.11.2).

LIVE LOAD. A load produced by the use and occupancy of the building or other structure that does not include construction or environmental loads such as wind load, rain load, earthquake load, flood load or dead load.

Live loads, which are discussed in detail in Section 1607, are not environmental loads or dead loads, but are transient in nature and will vary in magnitude over the life of a structure.

LIVE LOAD, ROOF. A load on a roof produced:
1 During maintenance by workers, equipment and materials; or

2 During the life of the structure by movable objects such as planters or other similar small decorative appurtenances that are not occupancy related

This definition is needed for the proper application of the load combinations in Chapter 16. This definition clarifies what is considered a roof live load.

LIVE/WORK UNIT. A dwelling unit or sleeping unit in which a significant portion of the space includes a nonresidential use that is operated by the tenant.

Live/work dwelling units incorporate both living space and nonresidential use spaces. Live/work units are growing in popularity in urban centers to bring a mix of uses to neighborhoods.

LOAD AND RESISTANCE FACTOR DESIGN (LRFD). A method of proportioning structural members and their connections using load and resistance factors such that no applicable limit state is reached when the structure is subjected to appropriate load combinations. The term “LRFD” is used in the design of steel and wood structures.

This definition describes the load and resistance factor design (LRFD) method, which is one of the design approaches recognized under the code in Section 1604.1. It is needed for the proper application of the steel design

===== Page 0131 =====
requirements in Chapter 22 and the wood design requirements in Chapter 23.

LOAD EFFECTS. Forces and deformations produced in structural members by the applied loads.

This definition is needed to properly apply the structural load requirements in Chapter 16. "Load effects" is a collective term used to refer to the internal member forces and member deformations that result from the applied loads.

LOAD FACTOR. A factor that accounts for deviations of the actual load from the nominal load, for uncertainties in the analysis that transforms the load into a load effect, and for the probability that more than one extreme load will occur simultaneously.

This definition clarifies the application of the LRFD load combinations in Chapter 16.

LOADS. Forces or other actions that result from the weight of building materials, occupants and their possessions, environmental effects, differential movement and restrained dimensional changes. Permanent loads are those loads in which variations over time are rare or of small magnitude, such as dead loads. All other loads are variable loads (see "Nominal loads").

This definition is needed for the proper application of the structural load requirements in Chapter 16. It also includes a definition of "Permanent loads" that serves as the distinction between variable loads and permanent loads. This is important in Section 1605.1, which requires all load combinations to be investigated with one or more of the variable loads taken as zero.

The distinction made between variable loads and permanent loads is fairly straightforward. Dead load is specifically mentioned because it is an ideal example of a load that does not vary over time. But dead load is not necessarily the only load that could be considered permanent. An additional complication is the definition of certain loads that may include both permanent and variable components. An indicator of this is provided in the load combinations in Section 1605. For instance, in the ASD basic load combinations given by Equations 16-11, 16-13 and 16-14, the variable loads are reduced by a factor of 0.75. Based on the application of the reduction factor in these load combinations, live load (L), roof live load (Lr), rain load (R), wind load (W) and earthquake load (E) are explicitly treated as variable loads. Since they are not reduced in these load combinations, pressure of a well-defined fluid, F, and lateral earth pressure, H, could be considered, at least in part, permanent loads.

LODGING HOUSE. A one-family dwelling where one or more occupants are primarily permanent in nature and rent is paid for guest rooms.

The code establishes a lodging house as a Group R-3 occupancy where there are five or fewer guest rooms. This definition provides a distinction from Group R-1 occupancies where the occupants are expected to be transient. For a lodging house, there are one or more occupants who are permanent; this is their home.

LOT. A portion or parcel of land considered as a unit.

A lot is a legally recorded parcel of land, the boundaries of which are described on a deed. Where code requirements are based on some element of a lot (such as yard area or lot line location), it is the physical attributes of the parcel of land that the code is addressing, not issues of ownership. Adjacent lots owned by the same party are treated as if they were owned by different parties because ownership can change at any time. However, a group of platted lots or subdivision lots could be joined together and “considered as a unit” for the purposes of the code. For example, a collection of platted lots could be used as a single building lot for the construction of a covered mall and its associated anchor buildings.

A condominium form of building ownership, whether a residential or commercial condominium, does not create separate lots (i.e., parcels of land) and such unit owners are treated as separate tenants, not separate lot owners. The lines separating one part of a condominium from another are not lot lines but lines indicating the limits of ownership. As such, walls constructed on lines separating condominium ownership would not need to be fire (or party) walls.

Legal property lines do not always constitute site boundaries (e.g., malls, condominiums, townhouses). A site could contain multiple legal "lot" divisions.

LOT LINE. A line dividing one lot from another, or from a street or any public place.

Lot lines are legally recorded divisions between two adjacent land parcels or lots. They are the reference point for the location of buildings for exterior separation and other code purposes (see the definition of "Lot" above).

LOW-ENERGY POWER-OPERATED DOOR. A swinging, sliding or folding door that opens automatically upon an action by a pedestrian such as pressing a push plate or waving a hand in front of a sensor. The door closes automatically, and operates with decreased forces and decreased speeds (see "Power-assisted door" and "Power-operated door").

===== Page 0132 =====
There are basically three different types of doors that provide some type of power assistance for entry and/or exit: low-energy power-operated doors, power-assisted doors and power-operated doors. The low-energy power-operated door is typically a side-swinging door that also operates as a manual door. However, this type of door has the additional feature of low-energy automatic operation when a person pushes on a plate or places a hand or arm near a sensor located on a wall or post near the door [see Commentary Figures 202(32), 202(33) and 202(34)]. The low-energy power-operated door is commonly operated by the user touching something to trigger the door's powered operation. Increasingly, low-energy power-operated doors are triggered by a noncontact sensor mounted nearby on a wall or post.

LOWER FLAMMABLE LIMIT (LFL). The minimum concentration of vapor in air at which propagation of flame will occur in the presence of an ignition source. The LFL is sometimes referred to as “LEL” or “lower explosive limit.”

Where the vapor-to-air ratio is somewhere between the LFL and the UFL, fires and explosions can occur upon introduction of an ignition source. The UFL is the maximum vapor-to-air concentration above which propagation of flame will not occur. Where a vapor-to-air mixture is below the LFL, it is described as being “too lean” to burn, and where it is above the UFL, it is “too rich” to burn. For further discussion of this material definition, see the commentary to Chapter 2 of SBC 801.

LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of Section 1612.

The lowest floor is the most important reference point when designing and constructing a building or structure in a flood hazard area. The term is specifically defined to include basements, which are any areas that are below grade on all sides for elevated buildings, compliance with the flood-resistant design and construction provisions of the code is determined by an elevation survey that documents that the lowest floor, including the basement, is at or above the required elevation. It is important to note that enclosures may be built below elevated buildings provided they meet both the design criteria and use limitations (see ASCE 24). Where compliant with the design criteria and use limitations, enclosures are not considered the lowest floor.
MAIN WINDFORCE-RESISTING SYSTEM. An assemblage of structural elements assigned to provide support and stability for the overall structure. The system generally receives wind loading from more than one surface.

This definition identifies the structural components that are to comply with special inspection requirements. The main wind force-resisting system is the global structural system designed to resist wind loads on the building or structure.

MALL BUILDING, COVERED and MALL BUILDING, OPEN. See “Covered mall building.”

MANUAL FIRE ALARM BOX. A manually operated device used to initiate an alarm signal.

Manual fire alarm boxes are commonly known as pull stations. Manual fire alarm boxes include all manual devices used to activate a manual fire alarm system and have many configurations, depending on the manufacturer. All manual fire alarm devices, however, must be approved and installed in accordance with NFPA 72 for the particular application. Manual fire alarm boxes may be combined in guard tour boxes.

MANUFACTURER'S DESIGNATION. An identification applied on a product by the manufacturer indicating that a product or material complies with a specified standard or set of rules (see "Label" and "Mark").

This represents terminology for a manufacturer's self-certification that a product complies with a given standard (see commentary, Section 1703.5). Also see the commentaries for the definitions of "Listed," "Mark," "Label" and "Labeled."

MARK. An identification applied on a product by the manufacturer indicating the name of the manufacturer and the function of a product or material (see "Label" and "Manufacturer's designation").

A mark represents the manufacturer's identification placed on a product, stating who made the product and describing its function. There is, however, no certification of compliance to any particular standard and no third-party quality control (see commentary, Section 1703.5). Also see the commentaries for the definitions of "Listed," "Label," "Labeled" and "Manufacturer's designation."

MARQUEE. A canopy that has a top surface which is sloped less than 25 degrees from the horizontal and is located less than 3 m from operable openings above or adjacent to the level of the marquee.

Marquees, unlike awnings, are fixed, permanent structures that justify sufficiently

===== Page 0133 =====
different requirements from those for other projections (see Section 3106 for code requirements for marquees). This definition also facilitates application of live loads in Table 1607.1

MASONRY. A built-up construction or combination of building units or materials of clay, shale, concrete, glass, gypsum, stone or other approved units bonded together with or without mortar or grout or other accepted methods of joining.

The materials (other than gypsum) and elements constructed as stated in this definition are considered masonry construction and are regulated by Chapter 21. This term identifies the building elements of plain (unreinforced) masonry, reinforced masonry, grouted masonry, glass unit masonry and masonry veneer.

GLASS UNIT MASONRY. Masonry composed of glass units bonded by mortar.

Glass unit masonry consists of nonclad-bearing assemblies designed in accordance with Section 2110.

PLAIN MASONRY. Masonry in which the tensile resistance of the masonry is taken into consideration and the effects of stresses in reinforcement are neglected.

Plain masonry has historically been referred to as “unreinforced masonry.” Since such masonry may actually contain some reinforcement, however, the term “unreinforced” has fallen out of favor. Where reinforcement is contained in plain masonry, its contribution to the strength of the system is required to be ignored. The bond between the masonry units and mortar is critical in the performance of plain masonry.

REINFORCED MASONRY. Masonry construction in which reinforcement acting in conjunction with the masonry is used to resist forces.

Reinforced masonry contains reinforcement (currently limited to steel reinforcement) and is designed considering the tensile strength of that reinforcement. Not all masonry containing reinforcement is considered reinforced masonry. Some plain masonry contains reinforcement (usually to reduce the size of any cracks that may form), but the contribution of that reinforcement is required to be neglected.

SOLID MASONRY. Masonry consisting of solid masonry units laid contiguously with the joints between the units filled with mortar.

This term describes single- or multiple-wythe walls composed of solid masonry units, including the thickness of the collar joint where it is filled with mortar or grout.
UNREINFORCED (PLAIN) MASONRY. Masonry in which the tensile resistance of masonry is taken into consideration and the resistance of the reinforcing steel, if present, is neglected.

See the commentary for "Plain masonry."

MASONRY UNIT. Brick, tile, stone, glass block or concrete block conforming to the requirements specified in Section 2103.

Masonry units are natural stone units or manufactured units of fired clay, shale, cementitious materials or glass.

HOLLOW. A masonry unit whose net cross-sectional area in any plane parallel to the load-bearing surface is less than 75 percent of its gross cross-sectional area measured in the same plane.

Hollow masonry units are those having a specified net cross-sectional area less than 75 percent of their corresponding gross cross-sectional area. Where the specified net cross-sectional area is equal to or greater than 75 percent of the gross cross-sectional area, the unit is considered to be solid.

SOLID. A masonry unit whose net cross-sectional area in every plane parallel to the load-bearing surface is 75 percent or more of its gross cross-sectional area measured in the same plane.

Solid masonry units have a specified net cross-sectional area 75 percent or greater of their corresponding gross cross-sectional area. Where the specified net cross-sectional area is less than 75 percent of the gross cross-sectional area, the unit is considered to be hollow.

MASS TIMBER. Structural elements of Type IV construction primarily of solid, built-up, panelized or engineered wood products that meet minimum cross-section dimensions of Type IV construction.

Mass timber is now specifically defined as representative of both the large wood building elements historically recognized as Heavy Timber (now Type IV-HT) construction and the three new construction types of IV-A, IV-B and IV-C. Heavy timber members have large cross sections to achieve a slow burning characteristic, with minimum dimensions established in Table 2304.11 of SBC 201. A single term now represents the various sawn and engineered wood products referenced in Chapter 23 (Wood) of SBC 201 and in ANSI/APA PRG 320, Standard for Performance-rated Cross-laminated Timber.

MASTIC FIRE-RESISTANT COATINGS. Liquid mixture applied to a substrate by brush, roller, spray or trowel that provides fire-resistant protection of a substrate when exposed to flame or intense heat.

Section 1705.16 requires special inspections for mastic fire-resistant coatings in accordance

===== Page 0134 =====
with AWCI 12-B, based on the fire-resistance design. Because AWCI 12-B does not define or describe these materials, this definition facilitates correct application of the special inspections.

MEANS OF EGRESS. A continuous and unobstructed path of vertical and horizontal egress travel from any occupied portion of a building or structure to a public way. A means of egress consists of three separate and distinct parts: the exit access, the exit and the exit discharge.

The means of egress is the path traveled by building occupants to leave the building and the site on which it is located. It includes all interior and exterior elements that the occupants must utilize as they make their way from every room and usable space within the building to a public way such as a street or alley. The elements that make up the means of egress create the lifeline that occupants utilize to travel out of the structure and a safe distance from the structure. The means of egress provisions strive to provide a reasonable level of life safety in every structure. The means of egress provisions are subdivided into three distinct portions (see the definitions of "Exit access," "Exit" and "Exit discharge").

MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT SCREEN. A rooftop structure, not covered by a roof, used to aesthetically conceal plumbing, electrical or mechanical equipment from view.

These are used mainly for appearance and to conceal roof-mounted equipment from view.

MECHANICAL-ACCESS ENCLOSED PARKING GARAGE. An enclosed parking garage that employs parking machines, lifts, elevators or other mechanical devices for vehicle moving from and to street level and in which public occupancy in the garage is prohibited in all areas except the vehicle access bay.

See the definition for “Mechanical-access open parking garages.” Enclosed parking garages must meet Section 406.6.

MECHANICAL-ACCESS OPEN PARKING GARAGES. Open parking garages employing parking machines, lifts, elevators or other mechanical devices for vehicles moving from and to street level and in which public occupancy is prohibited above the street level.

These types of garages are constructed with most of the same attributes as other garages. They have numerous parking levels that house motor vehicles; however, public access to these upper levels is not permitted. Employees take control of the vehicles at the street level and drive into a vertical mechanical device, which conveys the cars to the upper parking levels. These structures are still provided with the required openings of Section 406.5.2.

MEDICAL CARE. Care involving medical or surgical procedures, nursing or for psychiatric purposes.

* Persons who need medical care are likely to be incapable of self-preservation or at least extremely limited in their ability to evacuate. In consideration of occupant health and safety, hospitals and nursing homes at least partially rely on defend-in-place strategies. See also the commentary to Section 308, Group I-2.

Care facilities are used by care recipients of varying acuity seeking a broad spectrum of available support services. These facilities span a wide range of occupancy types, including Groups E, I and R. There are three types of care defined in the codes: personal, custodial and medical. On the lower end of the care spectrum (i.e., personal care) is where occupants are supervised but do not need custodial or medical care. Where occupants may be elderly or impaired (i.e., custodial care), they may need occasional daily living assistance such as cooking and cleaning. Persons who receive custodial care may or may not require assistance with evacuation depending on the occupancy and/or the "condition" of the occupancy. On the opposite end of the care spectrum, persons receiving care may be completely bedridden and dependent on medical gases and emergency power to maintain life (i.e., medical care). The level of care provided is based on the condition and capabilities of an occupant, which, in turn, indicate appropriate standards for protection systems, both active and passive. See also the definitions for "24-hour basis," "Custodial care," "Detoxification facilities," "Foster care facilities," "Group home," "Hospitals and psychiatric hospitals," "Incapable of self-preservation," "Nursing homes," and "Personal care service."

MEMBRANE PENETRATION. A breach in one side of a floor-ceiling, roof-ceiling or wall assembly to accommodate an item installed into or passing through the breach.

This term refers to the situation where a penetration is made of a single layer of a fire-resistance-rated assembly. Sections 714.4.2 and 714.5.2 establish criteria where the penetration of a single membrane of an assembly is permitted while still considering the assembly to have the required fire-resistance rating [see Commentary Figure 202(35) for an example of a single membrane penetration].

Where a penetration is made completely through a fire-resistance-rated wall or

===== Page 0135 =====
floor/ceiling assembly, it must be protected in accordance with Section 714.4.1 or 714.5.1, as applicable for the assembly penetrated.

## MEMBRANE-COVERED CABLE

STRUCTURE. A nonpressurized structure in which a mast and cable system provides support and tension to the membrane weather barrier and the membrane imparts stability to the structure.

This definition identifies a structure in which the membrane fabric is draped over a cable framework. These structures do not involve any interior air pressurization. The cable framework system is supported by a mast or other tower system. The cables are usually pretensioned to provide structural support for the rest of the exterior structure.

## MEMBRANE-COVERED FRAME

STRUCTURE. A nonpressurized building wherein the structure is composed of a rigid framework to support a tensioned membrane which provides the weather barrier.

This type of membrane structure is the same as the membrane-covered cable structure, except that a trussed framework constructed of structural shapes provides the support instead of pretensioned cables. Again, no air pressurization is required or provided.

MEMBRANE-PENETRATION FIRESTOP. A material, device or construction installed to resist for a prescribed time period the passage of flame and heat through openings in a protective membrane in order to accommodate cables, cable trays, conduit, tubing, pipes or similar items.

Sections 714.4.2 and 714.5.2 both refer to protection methods for membrane penetrations of fire-resistance-rated walls, floor/ceiling assemblies and roof/ceiling assemblies.

MEMBRANE-PENETRATION FIRESTOP SYSTEM. An assemblage consisting of a fire-resistance-rated floor-ceiling, roof-ceiling or wall assembly, one or more penetrating items installed into or passing through the breach in one side of the assembly and the materials or devices, or both, installed to resist the spread of fire into the assembly for a prescribed period of time.

Membrane-penetration firestop systems maintain the required protection from the spread of fire, passage of hot gases and transfer of heat. A firestop usually refers to a single item, where a system is a combination of elements. See also the commentary to the definition of "Through-penetration firestop system."

MERCHANDISE PAD. A merchandise pad is an area for display of merchandise surrounded by aisles, permanent fixtures or walls. Merchandise pads contain elements such as nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions as indicated in Section 105.2 from which customers browse or shop.

Merchandise pads would most likely be found in large stores with changing displays of clothes or furniture. This is not a raised display-only area. These areas allow customers to move between displays or racks. In regard to means of egress, merchandise pads could be considered analogous to areas of fixed seating or groups of tables. The aisle access-ways are in the merchandise pad and lead to the aisles on the outside edges of the merchandise pads. Not all stores will contain merchandise pads (e.g., a typical grocery store with fixed shelves and aisles).

METAL COMPOSITE MATERIAL (MCM). A factory manufactured panel consisting of metal skins bonded to both faces of a solid plastic core.

These types of panels are sandwich construction composed of thin metal (usually aluminum or steel) sheets covering a solid plastic core. The panels typically have thicknesses that do not exceed 6.5 mm. Metal composite material (MCM) panels are different from other types of sandwich panels in that they do not typically contain foam plastic cores and are not typically intended to provide thermal insulation.

METAL COMPOSITE MATERIAL (MCM)
SYSTEM. An exterior wall covering fabricated using MCM in a specific assembly including joints, seams, attachments, substrate, framing and other details as appropriate to a particular design.

The provisions of Section 1406 detail the components that are typically part of a metal composite material (MCM) installation. The components of the exterior wall-covering system consist of framing members for the attachment and support of the MCM panels; the types of joints and seams used to maintain the weather resistance of the system; and the means for attaching the entire system to the building substrate or structural frame.

METAL ROOF PANEL. An interlocking metal sheet having a minimum installed weather exposure of  \( 0.28 \, m^{2} \)  per sheet.

There are two general categories of metal roofing systems: architectural metal roofing and structural metal roofing. Architectural metal roofs are generally watersheding roof systems and structural metal roofs have hydrostatic (water barrier) characteristics. The difference between a "metal roof panel" and a "metal roof shingle" is the weather exposure (i.e., that portion of the roofing exposed) (see Section 1507.4).

METAL ROOF SHINGLE. An interlocking metal sheet having an installed weather exposure

===== Page 0136 =====
less than 0.28 m² per sheet.

See the commentary for the definition of "Metal roof panel."

MEZZANINE. An intermediate level or levels between the floor and ceiling of any story and in accordance with Section 505.

A common design feature in factories, warehouses and mercantile buildings is an intermediate loft, or platform, between the story levels of a building. This type of feature, or mezzanine, can be found in buildings of all occupancies. The code must determine whether this intermediate level is another story of the building or whether it can simply be treated as part of the story in which it is contained. The basic rule is that the intermediate level must be less than one-third of the area of the story below (of the room in which it is located) in order to be considered a mezzanine. However, a variety of exceptions are provided by the code. Requirements for mezzanines are found in Section 505.

MINERAL BOARD. A rigid felted thermal insulation board consisting of either felted mineral fiber or cellular beads of expanded aggregate formed into flat rectangular units.

This form of insulation is listed in Table 721.1(2), Items 15-1.9, 15-1.10 and 15-1.11.

MINERAL FIBER. Insulation composed principally of fibers manufactured from rock, slag or glass, with or without binders.

This term provides a definition for a type of insulation that is commonly used or accepted within rated assemblies [see Table 721.1(2), Item 15-1.11] or as a fireblocking material (see Section 718.2.1).

MINERAL WOOL. Synthetic vitreous fiber insulation made by melting predominantly igneous rock or furnace slag, and other inorganic materials, and then physically forming the melt into fibers.

This term provides a definition for a type of insulation that is commonly used or accepted within rated assemblies [see Table 721.1(2), Item 15-1.11] or as a fireblocking material (see Section 718.2.1).

MODIFIED BITUMEN ROOF COVERING. One or more layers of polymer-modified asphalt sheets. The sheet materials shall be fully adhered or mechanically attached to the substrate or held in place with an approved ballast layer.

These are composite sheets consisting of copolymer modified bitumen, often reinforced and sometimes surfaced with various types of films, foils and mats.

MORTAR. A mixture consisting of cementitious materials, fine aggregates, water, with or without admixtures, that is used to construct unit masonry assemblies.
Mortar is the material that bonds masonry units and accessories together and compensates for dimensional variations of the units. Both the plastic and hardened properties of mortar are important for strong, durable, water-tight construction. Material requirements and referenced standards for several permitted mortar types are given in Section 2103.2.

MORTAR, SURFACE-BONDING. A mixture to bond concrete masonry units that contains hydraulic cement, glass fiber reinforcement with or without inorganic fillers or organic modifiers and water.

This mortar is a packaged, dry, combined material permitted for use in the surface bonding of concrete masonry units that have not been prefaced, coated or painted. Masonry units are stacked without mortar joints and surface-bonding mortar is then applied to both sides of the wall surface, creating a structural element.

MULTILEVEL ASSEMBLY SEATING. Seating that is arranged in distinct levels where each level is comprised of either multiple rows, or a single row of box seats accessed from a separate level.

Assembly rooms may include a sloped seating arrangement (i.e., either ramped or stepped) to improve the viewing of the event for the occupants. These spaces can be single- or multiple-level arrangements. For example, for an auditorium with a sloped floor, the entire main floor is a single level. A level can be a balcony or a separate section of seating in an arena or stadium, such as skyspaces. The upper-seating bowl in the coliseum is a separate level, as is the loge in the theater. However, it is not the intent of this provision that each row of seats be considered a separate level.

MULTIPLE-STATION ALARM DEVICE. Two or more single-station alarm devices that can be interconnected such that actuation of one causes all integral or separate audible alarms to operate. A multiple-station alarm device can consist of one single-station alarm device having connections to other detectors or to a manual fire alarm box.

This definition refers to a combination of similar or different types of alarm devices that could be interconnected. The actuation of any two devices, whether a smoke detector or manual fire alarm box, will activate the required audible alarms at all interconnected devices.

MULTIPLE-STATION SMOKE ALARM. Two or more single-station alarm devices that are capable of interconnection such that actuation of one causes the appropriate alarm signal to operate in all interconnected alarms.

===== Page 0137 =====
In occupancies with sleeping areas, occupants must be notified of a fire so that they can promptly evacuate the premises. In accordance with the requirements of NFPA 72, multiple-station smoke alarms are self-contained, smoke-activated alarm devices built in accordance with UL 217 that can be interconnected with other devices so that all integral or separate alarms will operate where any one device is activated.

MULTISTORY UNIT. A dwelling unit or sleeping unit with habitable space located on more than one story.

A multistory dwelling or sleeping unit has living, sleeping, eating, cooking or bathroom space on more than one floor level within the unit (see Section 1108.7.2). A residence with only a garage underneath or an unfinished basement would not be a multistory unit.

NAILING, BOUNDARY. A special nailing pattern required by design at the boundaries of diaphragms.

Where designing a diaphragm or a shear wall, the sheathing for those elements must be properly attached to provide the design resistance to the applied load. Shear capacity tables for wood structural panels specify the nail size and spacing to be used along the edge and in the field of each panel. Boundary nailing is the required nailing pattern for panels located along the edges of diaphragms and at other boundaries where the stresses are typically high.

NAILING, EDGE. A special nailing pattern required by design at the edges of each panel within the assembly of a diaphragm or shear wall.

Where designing a diaphragm or shear panel, the sheathing for those elements must be attached in a fashion that will provide resistance to the design load. Shear capacity tables for wood structural panels used as sheathing specify fastener size and spacing. Edge nailing occurs at diaphragm or shear wall edges. In some cases, such as at blocked diaphragm boundaries, the edge of the panel occurs at the diaphragm boundary, in which case the edge must be boundary nailed.

NAILING, FIELD. Nailing required between the sheathing panels and framing members at locations other than boundary nailing and edge nailing.

Where designing a diaphragm or shear panel, the sheathing for those elements must be attached in a fashion that will provide resistance to the applied load. Shear capacity tables for wood structural panels used as sheathing specify fastener size and spacing. For example, Note b in Table 2306.2(1) indicates that the maximum spacing for fasteners along intermediate framing members must be 300 mm on center.

NATURALLY DURABLE WOOD. The heartwood of the following species except for the occasional piece with corner sapwood, provided 90 percent or more of the width of each side on which it occurs is heartwood.

Because of their natural ability to resist deterioration, the harder portions of some species of wood are considered to be naturally durable. The code specifies that “occasional” sapwood is permitted, provided that heartwood constitutes 90 percent of each side.

DECAY RESISTANT. Redwood, cedar, black locust and black walnut.

Redwood, cedar, black locust and black walnut lumber are known to resist deterioration due to the action of microbes that enter the wood fibers. The code defines these species of lumber as being decay resistant.

TERMITE RESISTANT. Redwood, Alaska yellow cedar, Eastern red cedar and Western red cedar.

Alaskan yellow cedar, redwood, Eastern red cedar and Western red cedar are considered to be resistant to infestation by termites and are thus listed as naturally durable.

NOMINAL LOADS. The magnitudes of the loads specified in Chapter 16 (dead, live, soil, wind, rain, flood and earthquake).

This definition explains the term “nominal loads” so that the loads to be applied are clear. For the most part, the loads determined in Chapter 16 are considered nominal loads, which are used directly in allowable stress design (ASD) or multiplied by a load factor for use in strength or load and resistance factor design (LRFD). The exceptions are earthquake-load effect, E, as well as the wind load, W, both of which are considered strength level loads.

NOMINAL SIZE (LUMBER). The commercial size designation of width and depth, in standard sawn lumber and glued-laminated lumber grades; somewhat larger than the standard net size of dressed lumber, in accordance with DOCPS 20 for sawn lumber and with the ANSI/AWC NDS for glued-laminated lumber.

Unless specifically required by the code, all dimensions listed for wood member sizes are nominal, not actual. U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) PS 20 specifies the required minimum dimension of lumber for each stated nominal size. The process used to smooth and finish the surface of the lumber and to dry the wood removes a certain thickness of wood on each side of the piece; therefore, a 2 by 4 is approximately 40 mm by 90 mm. The actual

===== Page 0138 =====
dimension of the lumber, otherwise known as dressed size, is limited to ensure consistency in lumber sizes, which is essential to the satisfactory construction of a wood-frame building.

## NONCOMBUSTIBLE MEMBRANE

STRUCTURE. A membrane structure in which the membrane and all component parts of the structure are noncombustible.

Any membrane structure that is constructed of all non-combustible materials is classified by this definition. To qualify as noncombustible, the materials, including the membrane itself, must be tested in accordance with ASTM E136.

NONCOMBUSTIBLE PROTECTION (FOR MASS TIMBER). Noncombustible material, in accordance with Section 703.6, designed to increase the fire-resistance rating and delay the combustion of mass timber.

This definition addresses the passive fire protection sometimes required for mass timber construction. Depending on the building's type of construction, mass timber is permitted to have its own fire-resistance rating, have a fire-resistance rating through a combination of the inherent mass timber fire-resistance plus protection with noncombustible insulating materials, or use the noncombustible protection to provide the entire fire-resistance rating. The definition of noncombustible protection also recognizes its value in delaying the combustion of mass timber members.

NONSTRUCTURAL CONCRETE. Any element made of plain or reinforced concrete that is not part of a structural system required to transfer either gravity or lateral loads to the ground.

This definition enables the code user to correctly apply the durability requirements of Section 1904.

## NORMAL TEMPERATURE AND PRESSURE

(NTP). A temperature of  \( 20^{\circ} \) C and a pressure of 101.3 kPa.

This term refers to the standard room temperature at atmospheric pressure. Atmospheric pressure results from the weight of air elevated above the earth's surface. At sea level, the atmosphere exerts a pressure of 101.3 kPa. The properties of commercially available compressed gases are indicated at their normal temperature and pressure (NTP).

NOSING. The leading edge of treads of stairs and of landings at the top of stairway flights.

The front edge of the tread that is exposed to the user's foot provides the visual clue for the placement of the foot in both ascent and descent. The nosings of a stair are a reference point for the measurement of the tread depth and riser height. The line connecting the nosings serves as the reference for the measurement of handrail and guard heights as well as headroom. The code ensures their uniformity by limiting the projection of the tread and landing nosings, resulting in a stairway that is easy to use. Where too large, nosings are a tripping hazard when walking up a stair. Where too small in relation to tread depth, the effective tread depth required for heel clearance in descent is minimized. The code provides limits for both minimum and maximum nosing projections and establishes a minimum tread depth where no projection is required [see Commentary Figures 1011.5.2 and 1011.5.5.1]. An exception to these limits exists in the requirements for both alternating tread devices and ship's ladders where an exaggerated projected tread depth, required to provide for reasonable foot room, is unique to the steeper gradient and functional use of these devices.

## NOTIFICATION ZONE. See “Zone, notification.”

NUISANCE ALARM. An alarm caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or lack of proper maintenance, or an alarm activated by a cause that cannot be determined.

A nuisance alarm is essentially any alarm that occurs as a result of a condition that does not arise during the normal operation of the equipment. A nuisance alarm is not the same as a false alarm. A person who intentionally initiates an alarm by using a manual pull station or a person who accidentally initiates a smoke detector is not initiating a nuisance alarm. A nuisance alarm is, by nature, a factor of the system itself.

NURSING HOMES. Facilities that provide care, including both intermediate care facilities and skilled nursing facilities where any of the persons are incapable of self-preservation.

Persons in nursing homes may be physically incapable of self-preservation or at least extremely limited in their ability to evacuate. In consideration of an occupant's health as well as safety, hospitals and nursing homes at least partially rely on defend-in-place strategies. See the commentary to Sections 308 and 407. Care facilities are used by care recipients of varying acuity seeking a broad spectrum of available support services. These facilities span a wide range of occupancy types, including Groups E, I and R. The level of care provided is based on the condition and capabilities of an occupant, which, in turn, indicate appropriate standards for protection systems, both passive and active. See also the definitions for "24-hour basis," "Care suite,"

===== Page 0139 =====
“Custodial care,” “Detoxification facilities,” “Hospitals and psychiatric hospitals,” “Incapable of self-preservation” and “Medical care.”

OCCUPANT LOAD. The number of persons for which the means of egress of a building or portion thereof is designed.

In addition to the limitation on the maximum occupant load for a space, the code also requires the determination of the occupant load that is to be utilized for the design of the means of egress system. The number for the floor area per occupant (occupant load factor) in Table 1004.5 reflects common and traditional occupant densities based on the empirical data for the density of similar spaces. This occupant load is also utilized to determine the required number of plumbing fixtures (see Chapter 29) and where automatic sprinkler systems or fire alarm and detection systems are required (see Chapter 9).

OCCUPIABLE SPACE. A room or enclosed space designed for human occupancy in which individuals congregate for amusement, educational or similar purposes or in which occupants are engaged at labor, and which is equipped with means of egress and light and ventilation facilities meeting the requirements of this code.

Occupiable spaces are those areas designed for human occupancy. It applies to both residential and nonresidential spaces alike. Most spaces in a building are occupiable spaces. Based on the nature of the occupancy, various code sections apply. All habitable spaces are also considered occupiable (see the definition of "Habitable space"). However, all occupiable spaces are not habitable. Additionally, some spaces are neither habitable nor occupiable. The code identifies crawl spaces, attics, penthouses and elevated platforms (mechanical or industrial equipment) as unoccupied spaces. Since the code generally states how these spaces must be accessed, but does not specifically require means of egress, they would not be occupiable spaces. where access is limited to maintenance and service personnel, it is likely that a space is not occupiable.

OPEN PARKING GARAGE. A structure or portion of a structure with the openings as described in Section 406.5.2 on two or more sides that is used for the parking or storage of private motor vehicles as described in Section 406.5.3.

Open parking garages are defined as having uniformly distributed openings on not less than two sides totaling not less than 40 percent of the building perimeter. The aggregate area of the openings is to be a minimum of 20 percent of the total wall area of all perimeter walls (see Commentary Figure 406.5.2).

OPEN SYSTEM. The use of a solid or liquid hazardous material involving a vessel or system that is continuously open to the atmosphere during normal operations and where vapors are liberated, or the product is exposed to the atmosphere during normal operations. Examples of open systems for solids and liquids include dispensing from or into open beakers or containers, dip tank and plating tank operations.

See the commentary to the definition of "Closed system."

OPEN-AIR ASSEMBLY SEATING. Seating served by means of egress that is not subject to smoke accumulation within or under a structure and is open to the atmosphere.

An example of open-air assembly seating is an open outdoor grandstand. The intent is to separate this from smoke-protected seating such as an indoor arena with a smoke control system. The code has less stringent requirements for certain aspects of open-air or smoke-protected assembly seating than for seating that is not smoke protected, since occupants are subject to less hazard from the accumulation of smoke and fumes during a fire event. For example, an assembly dead-end aisle is permitted to be longer for an open-air assembly area.

OPEN-ENDED CORRIDOR. An interior corridor that is open on each end and connects to an exterior stairway or ramp at each end with no intervening doors or separation from the corridor.

Breezeway configurations are common in hotels and apartment buildings, especially in areas where being open to the outside is considered an amenity. By essentially being open to the outside, the intent and level of safety is similar to an exterior egress balcony (see Section 1027.6, Exception 3 for requirements).

OPENING PROTECTIVE. A fire door assembly, fire shutter assembly, fire window assembly or glass-block assembly in a fire-resistance-rated wall or partition.

An opening protective is an assembly, such as a door or window, that is allowed in a fire-resistance wall or partition. These openings typically are allowed to have a lesser fire-resistance rating than the wall in which they are installed subject to other limitations, such as total aggregate area of openings for a given wall area. Opening protectives include fire door assemblies, fire shutter assemblies, fire window assemblies and glassblock assemblies. These opening protectives may be

===== Page 0140 =====
allowed in combination within the same fire-resistance-rated walls.

OPERATING BUILDING. A building occupied in conjunction with the manufacture, transportation or use of explosive materials. Operating buildings are separated from one another with the use of intraplant or intraline distances.

Magazines are used for the storage of explosive materials. Manufacturing or operating buildings used for the storage of explosives are not magazines and are not intended to be used for storage, although at times there may be storage incidental to the manufacturing function. This definition is included here to clarify this difference.

ORDINARY PRECAST STRUCTURAL WALL. See Section 1905.1.1.

This definition is a modification of SBC 304 text and is therefore located in Section 1905.

ORDINARY REINFORCED CONCRETE

STRUCTURAL WALL. See Section 1905.1.1.

This definition is a modification of SBC 304 text and is therefore located in Section 1905.

ORDINARY STRUCTURAL PLAIN CONCRETE WALL. See Section 1905.1.1.

This definition is a modification of SBC 304 text and is therefore located in Section 1905.

ORGANIC PEROXIDE. An organic compound that contains the bivalent -O-O- structure and which may be considered to be a structural derivative of hydrogen peroxide where one or both of the hydrogen atoms have been replaced by an organic radical. Organic peroxides can pose an explosion hazard (detonation or deflagration) or they can be shock sensitive. They can also decompose into various unstable compounds over an extended period of time.

CLASS I. Those formulations that are capable of deflagration but not detonation.

CLASS II. Those formulations that burn very rapidly and that pose a moderate reactivity hazard.

CLASS III. Those formulations that burn rapidly and that pose a moderate reactivity hazard.

CLASS IV. Those formulations that burn in the same manner as ordinary combustibles and that pose a minimal reactivity hazard.

CLASS V. Those formulations that burn with less intensity than ordinary combustibles or do not sustain combustion and that pose no reactivity hazard.

UNCLASSIFIED DETONABLE. Organic peroxides that are capable of detonation. These peroxides pose an extremely high explosion hazard through rapid explosive decomposition.

The chemical structure of organic peroxides differs from that of hydrogen peroxide (an oxidizer) in that an organic radical replaces the hydrogen atoms. Organic chemicals are all carbon based. As a result, organic peroxides pose varying degrees of fire or explosion hazards, in addition to their oxidizing properties. The classification of organic peroxides is based on the provisions of NFPA 432 (formerly NFPA 43B). Proper material classification of organic peroxides is essential to determining the appropriate occupancy classification of the structure. Examples of organic peroxides include acetyl cyclohexane, sulfonyl peroxide and benzoyl peroxide. The actual class of these materials is dependent on the percentage of concentration by weight. Most organic peroxides are available as liquids, pastes or solids in a powder form. For further discussion of this material definition, see the commentary to Chapter 2 of SBC 801.

ORTHOGONAL. To be in two horizontal directions, at 90 degrees to each other.

This definition applies to the alternative seismic design category determination permitted under Section 1613.2.5.1. It makes it clear that the directions (axes) referred to are in the horizontal plane.

OTHER STRUCTURES (for Chapter 16-23). Structures, other than buildings, for which loads are specified in Chapter 16.

This definition is needed for application of the minimum load requirements to structures other than buildings that are included in Chapter 16. Note that buildings are defined as “Structures used to support or shelter an occupancy.”

OUTPATIENT CLINIC. See “Clinic, outpatient.” OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, entity, firm or corporation having any legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding an interest or title to the property; or otherwise having possession or control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.

This term defines the person or other legal entity responsible for a building and its compliance with code requirements.

OXIDIZER. A material that readily yields oxygen or other oxidizing gas, or that readily reacts to promote or initiate combustion of combustible materials and, if heated or contaminated, can result in vigorous self-sustained decomposition.

CLASS 4. An oxidizer that can undergo an explosive reaction due to contamination or exposure to thermal or physical shock and that causes a severe increase in the burning rate of combustible materials with which it comes into

===== Page 0141 =====
contact. Additionally, the oxidizer causes a severe increase in the burning rate and can cause spontaneous ignition of combustibles.

CLASS 3. An oxidizer that causes a severe increase in the burning rate of combustible materials with which it comes in contact.

CLASS 2. An oxidizer that will cause a moderate increase in the burning rate of combustible materials with which it comes in contact.

CLASS 1. An oxidizer that does not moderately increase the burning rate of combustible materials.

The classification of oxidizers is based on the provisions of NFPA 430. Oxidizers, whether a solid, liquid or gas, yield oxygen or another oxidizing gas during a chemical reaction or readily react to oxidize combustibles. The rate of reaction varies with the class of oxidizer. Specific classification of oxidizers is important because of the varying degree of hazard. Examples of oxidizers include liquid hydrogen peroxide, nitric acid, sulfuric acid and solids such as sodium chlorite, chromic acid and calcium hypochlorite. Many commercially available swimming pool chemicals are indicative of Class 2 or 3 oxidizers. For further discussion of this material definition, see the commentary to Chapter 2 of SBC 801.

OXIDIZING GAS. A gas that can support and accelerate combustion of other materials more than air does.

Oxidizers sometimes yield oxidizing gases during a chemical reaction. These gases are capable of supporting and accelerating the combustion of other materials. Examples of oxidizing gases include bromine, chlorine and fluorine.

PANEL (PART OF A STRUCTURE). The section of a floor, wall or roof comprised between the supporting frame of two adjacent rows of columns and girders or column bands of floor or roof construction.

This definition is needed to apply the structural load requirements in Chapter 16.

PANIC HARDWARE. A door-latching assembly incorporating a device that releases the latch upon the application of a force in the direction of egress travel. See “Fire exit hardware.”

Panic hardware is commonly used in the means of egress in educational and assembly-type spaces where the number of occupants who would use a doorway during a short time frame in an emergency is high in relation to an occupancy with a less dense occupant load. Panic hardware is required so that the door can be easily opened during an emergency where pressure on a door from a crush of people could render normal hardware inoperable. Panic hardware for doors that are required to be fire-protection-rated must be listed for that purpose (see the definition for "Fire exit hardware" and 1010.2.9).

PARTICLEBOARD. A generic term for a panel primarily composed of cellulosic materials (usually wood), generally in the form of discrete pieces or particles, as distinguished from fibers. The cellulosic material is combined with synthetic resin or other suitable bonding system by a process in which the interparticle bond is created by the bonding system under heat and pressure.

Particleboard is one of the family of wood-based products that can be used as wood panels. The definition describes the characteristics unique to particleboard as compared to other types of wood-based composite panels. Note that particleboard is not considered wood structural panel. Particleboard intended for use as wood structural panels is subject to the requirements of Section 2303.1.8, which references ANSI A208.1. Particleboard intended for use in shear panels is regulated by the requirements of Section 2306.3, which references the SDPWS.

PENETRATION FIRESTOP. A throughput-penetration firestop or a membrane-penetration firestop.

See the commentaries for the definitions of "Membrane-penetration firestop" and "Through-penetration firestop system."

PENTHOUSE. An enclosed, unoccupied roof-top structure used for sheltering mechanical and electrical equipment, tanks, elevators and related machinery, and vertical shaft openings.

Any enclosed structure that is located above the surrounding roof surfaces can be considered a penthouse as long as it meets the criteria within Section 1511.2. By complying with these requirements, the penthouse is considered to not contribute to the height of the building either in number of stories or meter above grade plane. Where the penthouse does not meet these requirements, it must be considered as an additional story of the building.

PERFORMANCE CATEGORY. A designation of wood structural panels as related to the panel performance used in Chapter 23.

The term “performance category” reflects the latest versions of the DOC PS 1 and PS 2 standards, which use terminologies of bond classification to reference glue type and performance categories to reference the thicknesses tolerance consistent with nominal panel thicknesses in the code. The performance category value is the “nominal panel thickness” or “panel thickness” (see Section 2303.1.4).

===== Page 0142 =====
## PERIMETER FIRE CONTAINMENT

SYSTEM. An assemblage of specific materials or products that is designed to resist for a prescribed period of time the passage of fire through voids created at the intersection of exterior curtain wall assemblies and fire-resistance-rated floor or floor/ceiling assemblies.

“Perimeter fire containment system” describes the method of protecting the void at the intersection of an exterior curtain wall assembly and a fire-resistance-rated floor or floor/ceiling assembly from the passage of fire. See also the commentary to Section 715.4.

## PERMANENT INDIVIDUAL TRUSS

MEMBER DIAGONAL BRACING (PITMDB). Structural member or assembly intended to permanently stabilize the PITMRs.

Where a permanent individual truss member restraint (PITMR) is provided to stabilize an individual truss member, the permanent individual truss member diagonal bracing (PITMDB) stabilizes the PITMR to add stability for the entire system. PITMRs stabilize the truss while PITMDBs stabilize the PITMRs. This definition clarifies requirements for permanent individual truss member restraint that appear in Section 2303.4. See Figure 2303.4.1.2 for examples.

## PERMANENT INDIVIDUAL TRUSS

MEMBER RESTRAINT (PITMR). Restraint that is used to prevent local buckling of an individual truss chord or web member because of the axial forces in the individual truss member.

Permanent bracing is sometimes required within a trussed system to provide long-term stability and/or lateral force resistance. Individual truss structural components are designed to withstand loading conditions within a particular plane, so there are instances where the building designer may specify the use of permanent individual truss member restraint (PITMR). PITMRs stabilize the truss while PITMDBs stabilize the PITMRs. This definition clarifies requirements for permanent individual truss member restraint that appear in Section 2303.4. See Figure 2303.4.1.2 for examples.

PERMIT. An official document or certificate issued by the building official that authorizes performance of a specified activity.

The permit constitutes a license issued by the building official to proceed with specific activity, such as construction of a building, in accordance with all applicable laws. For the code and SBC 1101/1102, the "building official" is identified as the person responsible for issuing the permit. For SBC 801, the "fire code official" is identified as the person responsible.
For other Saudi-Codes, the "building official" is identified as the person responsible.

PERSON. An individual, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.

Corporations and other organizations listed in the definition are treated as persons under the law. Also, where the code provides for a penalty (see Section 114.4), the definition makes it clear that the individuals responsible for administering the activities of these various organizations are subject to these penalties.

PERSONAL CARE SERVICE. The care of persons who do not require medical care. Personal care involves responsibility for the safety of the persons while inside the building.

Persons who need personal care may need supervision, but they are capable of self-preservation (see the commentary to Section 305).

Care facilities are used by care recipients of varying acuity seeking a broad spectrum of available support services. These facilities span a wide range of occupancy types including Groups E, I and R. There are three types of care defined in the codes: personal, custodial and medical. On the lower end of the care spectrum (i.e., personal care) is where occupants are supervised but do not need custodial or medical care. Where occupants may be elderly or impaired (i.e., custodial care) they may need occasional daily living assistance such as cooking and cleaning. While occupants may take longer to evacuate than average, they are capable of self-preservation. Persons receiving medical care may be completely bedridden and dependent on medical gases and emergency power to maintain life. The level of care provided is based on the condition and capabilities of an occupant, which, in turn, indicate appropriate standards for protection systems and building. See also the definitions for "24-hour basis," "Custodial care," "Detoxification facilities," "Foster care facilities," "Group home," "Hospitals and psychiatric hospitals," "Incapable of self-preservation," "Medical care" and "Nursing homes."

PHOTOLUMINESCENT. Having the property of emitting light that continues for a length of time after excitation by visible or invisible light has been removed.

Examples of photoluminescent material are paint and tape that are charged by exposure to light. When the lights are turned off, the product will “glow” in the dark. Products utilized to meet the requirements for luminous egress path markings in high-rise buildings (see Sections

===== Page 0143 =====
403.5.5 and 1025) or exit signs (see Section 1013.5) may be photoluminescent or self-luminous. A variety of materials can comply with the referenced standards for egress path markings, including ASTM E2072 and UL 1994; and for signs, UL 924.

PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE. A complete, environmentally protected unit consisting of solar cells, optics and other components, exclusive of tracker, designed to generate DC power when exposed to sunlight.

Photovoltaic modules generate electricity directly from sunlight via an electronic process that occurs naturally in certain types of material, called semiconductors. Electrons in these materials are freed by solar energy and can be induced to travel through an electrical circuit, powering electrical devices or sending electricity to the grid or to power storage systems. This definition clarifies requirements for photovoltaic modules that appear in Sections 1505 and 1510.

PHOTOVOLTAIC PANEL. A collection of modules mechanically fastened together, wired and designed to provide a field-installable unit.

This definition describes a panel composed of photovoltaic modules designed to be a field-installable unit as part of an electricity-generating photovoltaic panel system. This definition clarifies roof requirements for photovoltaic panels that appear in Sections 1505 and 1510.

PHOTOVOLTAIC PANEL SYSTEM. A system that incorporates discrete photovoltaic panels, that converts solar radiation into electricity, including rack support systems.

This definition describes a system of discrete photovoltaic panels designed to generate electricity. This definition clarifies requirements for photovoltaic panel systems in Chapter 15.

PHOTOVOLTAIC SHINGLES. A roof covering resembling shingles that incorporates photovoltaic modules.

Photovoltaic shingles incorporate photovoltaic modules that mimic the appearance and function of conventional roofing materials such as asphalt or slate, while performing their core task of generating electricity. This definition clarifies roof-covering requirements that appear in Section 1507.17.

PHYSICAL HAZARD. A chemical for which there is evidence that it is a combustible liquid, cryogenic fluid, explosive, flammable (solid, liquid or gas), organic peroxide (solid or liquid), oxidizer (solid or liquid), oxidizing gas, pyrophoric (solid, liquid or gas), unstable (reactive) material (solid, liquid or gas) or water-reactive material (solid or liquid).
Those materials that present a detonation hazard, a deflagration hazard or that readily support combustion are considered physical hazards. Examples of the types of materials that present a physical hazard are included in the definition. Buildings and structures containing materials that present a physical hazard in excess of the maximum allowable quantity would be classified in Group H-1, H-2 or H-3. Materials that present a physical hazard may also present a health hazard (see the definition of "Health hazard").

PHYSIOLOGICAL WARNING THRESHOLD LEVEL. A concentration of air-borne contaminants, normally expressed in parts per million (ppm) or milligrams per cubic meter (mg per m \( ^{3} \) ), that represents the concentration at which persons can sense the presence of the contaminant due to odor, irritation or other quick-acting physiological response. When used in conjunction with the permissible exposure limit (PEL) the physiological warning threshold levels are those consistent with the classification system used to establish the PEL. See the definition of "Permissible exposure limit (PEL)" in SBC 801.

The term “physiological warning properties” is not defined. From a practical standpoint, the physiological warning properties are represented by a concentration of a contaminant that allows the average individual to sense its presence by sensory stimuli such as odor, throat irritation, coughing, eye irritation, a running nose and similar signals.

There may be a wide variability reported for some of the more common threshold levels, including that of olfactory perception. Variations that may be encountered are due to a number of factors, including the methods used in their determination, the population exposed and others. The requirements for gas detection established in the code are tied to the PEL, and there are several methods for determining the PEL inherent in the definition of that term. This definition is intended to link the determination of the physiological warning threshold level to the data used to determine the PEL.

For example, the PEL as established by DOL 29 CFR, Part 1910.1000 is primarily based on data developed by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) called threshold limit values (TLVs), as referenced in the definition of PEL found in Chapter 2 of SBC 801. To substantiate the TLVs (PELs), the ACGIH publishes Documentation of the Threshold Limit Values and Biological Exposure Indices where the user is provided with data used in establishing those limits. The significant commercially

===== Page 0144 =====
available toxic and highly toxic gases with published TLVs are listed by ACGIH, and perception thresholds are provided.

These warning properties are considered, as evidenced by the documentation, where the TLV and, hence, the PEL is established. It is appropriate that the data used in the base documents be used as the basis for determining the threshold level where such data are available. The use of data from other sources may be used in the absence of data within the system used for the establishment of the PEL, but where such data have been considered in determining the PEL, such data should take precedent.

By providing a definition for “Physiological warning threshold level” and guidance as to how it is to be applied, the code user is given guidance that carries out the intent of the provisions for gas detection that have been established in the code. See the commentary to Section 6004.2.2.10 of SBC 801 for further discussion of gas detection.

PLASTIC COMPOSITE. A generic designation that refers to wood/plastic composites, plastic lumber and similar materials.

Plastic composites can be composed of plastic, wool/ plastic composites or other similar materials. These components are typically used for exterior decking and railing systems and are subject to specific physical testing and labeling requirements.

PLASTIC GLAZING. Plastic materials that are glazed or set in a frame or sash or are otherwise supported.

In lieu of glass, plastic is permitted to be used as a glazing material. Plastic glazing is required to meet the same load requirements as glass.

PLASTIC LUMBER. A manufactured product made primarily of plastic materials (filled or unfilled) which is generally rectangular in cross section.

Plastic lumber is manufactured of plastic and a uses a variety of materials to provide strength and stiffness. These components are typically used for exterior decking and railing systems. Chapter 26, which regulates plastic materials, contains requirements for plastic lumber used as exterior decking components, such as deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guardrails.

PLATFORM. A raised area within a building used for the presentation of music, plays or other entertainment; the head table for special guests; the raised area for lecturers and speakers; boxing and wrestling rings; theater-in-the-round stages; and similar purposes wherein, other than horizontal sliding curtains, there are no overhead hanging curtains, drops, scenery or stage effects other than lighting and sound. A temporary platform is one installed for not more than 30 days.

Platforms are raised areas that are used for public performances and presentations that, except for lighting, do not incorporate any overhead hanging curtains, drops, scenery or stage effects. Additionally, while it is not specified, the fuel load on platforms (e.g., a podium for a lecturer or a boxing ring) is anticipated to be low.

Thus, since the fuel load on platforms is ordinarily low and there is no fuel load overhead in areas that would be difficult to access, the code requirements for platforms are less stringent than for stages.

Since many platforms are installed and used on a temporary basis, this definition specifically defines temporary use as 30 days or less. Temporary use is less likely to accumulate additional fuel loads, storage or waste materials on, beneath or above the platform. Platforms are distinct from equipment platforms (see Section 505.3). A platform addressed by this definition is typically not considered a mezzanine (see Section 505.2).

PLAY STRUCTURE. A structure composed of one or more components, where the user enters a play environment.

Play structures are regulated by Section 424. The regulations are aimed at such structures where they are inside of other buildings, such as a mall, restaurant, school, recreational facilities or even an office lobby. The regulations are focused on the flammability of the materials used in their assembly.

POLYPROPYLENE SIDING. A shaped material, made principally from polypropylene homo-polymer, or copolymer, which in some cases contains fillers or reinforcements, that is used to clad exterior walls of buildings.

Polypropylene siding is an exterior finish product that is available in many textures, colors and profiles. These products come from various manufacturers, each having specific installation requirements with which compliance is very important. Specification and installation requirements for polypropylene siding are discussed in Sections 1404.18 and 1403.12. Proper installation will result in expected product performance at varying temperatures by allowing for the expansion and contraction of the siding material and its components.

PORCELAIN TILE. Ceramic tile having an absorption of 0.5 percent or less in accordance with Table 10 of ANSI A137.1, or Tables 4 or 5 of ANSI A137.3.

Porcelain tile is one of a myriad of types of ceramic tile. Its unique characteristics and

===== Page 0145 =====
extremely low absorption rate require it to be dealt with differently from other materials, especially where applied as an exterior adhered veneer. These materials fall outside the scope of SBC 305. General installation limitations are found in 1404.10.2.

POSITIVE ROOF DRAINAGE. A design that accounts for deflections from all design loads and has sufficient additional slope to ensure that drainage of the roof occurs within 48 hours of precipitation.

The primary purpose of positive roof drainage is to allow prompt roof drainage. This lessens the potential damage to the roof of sitting water and prevents ponded water from imposing additional load on the structural support of the roof.

POWER-ASSISTED DOOR. Swinging door which opens by reduced pushing or pulling force on the door-operating hardware. The door closes automatically after the pushing or pulling force is released and functions with decreased forces.

See “Low-energy power-operated door” and “Power-operated door.”

There are basically three different types of doors that provide some type of power assistance for entry and/or exit: low-energy power-operated doors, power assisted doors and power-operated doors. The power assisted door is typically a side-swinging door that has the additional feature of powered assistance to reduce the force needed to move the door to the open position. Where a door has power assistance, the force or effort it takes to open the door while it is being pushed or pulled is reduced as long as a user maintains pressure on the hardware. When the hardware is released, the door will move to the closed position. Power-assisted doors are typically used where a door is an unusual size or weight. Power-assisted doors are less common than low-energy power-operated doors.

POWER-OPERATED DOOR. Swinging, sliding, or folding door which opens automatically when approached by a pedestrian or opens automatically upon an action by a pedestrian. The door closes automatically and includes provisions such as presence sensors to prevent entrapment. See "Low energy power-operated door" and "Power-assisted door."

There are basically three different types of doors that provide some type of power assistance for entry and/or exit: low-energy power-operated doors, power assisted doors and power-operated doors. The power-operated door can be a sliding, hinged or side-swinging door that operates automatically by either a motion sensor or sensor mat when someone approaches the door. Power-operated doors are most commonly installed at the busy entrances of commercial buildings.

PREFABRICATED WOOD I-JOIST. Structural member manufactured using sawn or structural composite lumber flanges and wood structural panel webs bonded together with exterior exposure adhesives, which forms an “I” cross-sectional shape.

Wood I-joists are structural members typically used in floor and roof construction manufactured out of sawn or structural composite lumber flanges and structural panel webs, bonded together with exterior adhesives forming an "I" cross section. This definition explains which engineered wood products are considered prefabricated wood I-joists in order to clarify the requirements in Section 2303.1.2

PRESERVATIVE-TREATED WOOD. Wood products that, when impregnated with chemicals by a pressure process or other means during manufacture, exhibit reduced susceptibility to damage by fungi, insects or marine borers.

Wood that is exposed to high levels of moisture or heat is susceptible to decay both from fungus and other organisms as well as insect attack. The damage caused by decay or insects can reduce the performance of wood members below the minimum level required by the code. Section 2304.12 identifies the locations where the use of naturally durable or preservative-treated wood is required. It is important to note that preservative treatment requires a pressure-treatment process. Painting, coating or other surface treatment does not necessarily produce preservative-treated wood that will perform as required. The treatment process uses pressure to achieve the depth of preservative penetration into the wood that is needed to verify that the wood will be resistant to decay and insects over time. Surface treatments may be washed away by rain or ground water or may chip or peel. Preservative-treated wood will not reduce susceptibility to all insects, only those that actually eat the wood.

The American Wood Protection Association (AWPA) standards are prescribed in Section 2303.1.9. These include waterborne, as well as oil borne, materials for treatment, testing and quality control of various wood and wood-based products. The American Lumber Standard Committee (ALSC) also accredits third-party inspection agencies, in a manner similar to their grading rules certification, for the quality control of preservative-treated wood products. Facsimiles of accredited agencies' quality

===== Page 0146 =====
marks for treatment are available from ALSC (see definition, "Fire-retardant-treated wood").

PRESTRESSED MASONRY. Masonry in which internal stresses have been introduced to counteract potential tensile stresses in masonry resulting from applied loads.

The definition provides an understanding of the term “prestressed masonry,” which is used to define particular types of shear wall systems recognized under the Masonry Standards Joint Committee (MSJC) Code.

PRIMARY STRUCTURAL FRAME. The primary structural frame shall include all of the following structural members:

1 The columns.

2 Structural members having direct connections to the columns, including girders, beams, trusses and spandrels.

3 Members of the floor construction and roof construction having direct connections to the columns.

4 Members that are essential to the vertical stability of the primary structural frame under gravity loading.

The primary structural frame and secondary members must meet different standards of design and protection as specified in Chapters 6 and 7. The definitions of these two terms spell out which elements of a structure's framing system are part of the primary structural framing system essential to carrying the gravity loads of the building. Such elements are generally required to have greater fire-resistance protection (see commentary, Table 601 and Section 704).

PRIVATE GARAGE. A building or portion of a building in which motor vehicles used by the tenants of the building or buildings on the premises are stored or kept, without provisions for repairing or servicing such vehicles for profit.

In Section 406, the code regulates two types of garages: private and public. Public garages are further broken into open or enclosed garages. Private garages are limited in size by Section 406.3 and can be accessible to either residential or nonresidential uses. The definition is intended to help distinguish private garages from public garages. Carports are also addressed in Section 406.3.

PROSCENIUM WALL. The wall that separates the stage from the auditorium or assembly seating area.

A proscenium wall separates the stage area from the audience. The performance on the stage is viewed through a large opening known as the main proscenium opening. Where the stage height is greater than 15 m, a proscenium wall of approved construction is required by Section 410.2.4.

PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS. See "Hospitals."

PUBLIC ENTRANCE. An entrance that is not a service entrance or a restricted entrance.

A public entrance is one that provides access for the general public or employees, other than the service entrance or a restricted entrance (see the commentaries for the definitions of "Service entrance" and "Restricted entrance" and to Section 1105.1). Entrances may be locked for security purposes, but where the door serves as an entrance for employees or residents with keys, that door would still be considered a public entrance. A sports facility where there is control at the entrance for ticket holders only would still be considered a public entrance.

PUBLIC WAY. A street, alley or other parcel of land open to the outside air leading to a street, that has been deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use and which has a clear width and height of not less than 3 m.

Public ways serve a variety of purposes in the code, including the determination of the allowable area of a building (see Section 506.2); the use as an open space for unlimited area buildings (see Section 507); the measurement of fire separation distance (see Section 202); as well as many provisions for the means of egress (Chapter 10).

PUBLIC-USE AREAS. Interior or exterior rooms or spaces that are made available to the general public.

This term is utilized to describe all interior and exterior spaces or rooms that may be occupied by the general public for any amount of time. Spaces that are utilized by the general public may be located in facilities that are publicly or privately owned. Examples include the lobby in an office building, a high-school gymnasium with assembly seating, an open-air stadium, a multipurpose room, an exposition hall, a restaurant dining room, a health club, etc. (See also the commentary for the definitions of "Common use" and "Employee work area.")

PUZZLE ROOM. A puzzle room is a type of special amusement area in which occupants are encouraged to solve a challenge to escape from a room or series of rooms.

The puzzle room is a relatively new type of special amusement area and sometimes is called an escape room. There is at least the perception that occupants are locked into the room and cannot exit without solving a series of clues. See Section 411.

===== Page 0147 =====
PYROPHORIC. A chemical with an auto-ignition temperature in air, at or below a temperature of  \( 55^{\circ} \) C.

The definition is derived from DOL 29 CFR, Part 1910.1200. Pyrophoric materials, whether in a gas, liquid or solid form, are capable of spontaneous ignition at low temperatures. Examples of pyrophoric materials include silane and phosphine gas; liquid diethylaluminum chloride; and inert solids, such as cesium, plutonium, potassium and robidium. For further discussion of this material definition, see the commentary to it in Chapter 2 of SBC 801 Commentary.

PYROTECHNIC COMPOSITION. A chemical mixture that produces visible light displays or sounds through a self-propagating, heat-releasing chemical reaction which is initiated by ignition.

Pyrotechnic composition consists of those chemical components, including oxidizers, that cause fireworks to make noise or display light when ignited. The definition is derived from NFPA 1124. The amount of pyrotechnic composition is the determining factor in whether the storage area for consumer fireworks is classified as Group H-3. The pyrotechnic content of consumer fireworks is contained within a significant amount of packaging and nonexplosive materials used in their manufacture, which constitute the bulk of the weight of the fireworks devices.

RADIANT BARRIER. A material having a low-emittance surface of 0.1 or less installed in building assemblies.

Radiant barriers are typically installed in attics, primarily to reduce summer heat gain and reduce cooling costs. The barriers consist of a highly reflective material that reflects radiant heat rather than absorbing it. They do not, however, reduce heat conduction like thermal insulation materials. This definition enables the code user to correctly apply the material standards for these products in Section 1510.

RAMP. A walking surface that has a running slope steeper than one unit vertical in 20 units horizontal (5-percent slope).

This definition is needed to determine the threshold at which the ramp requirements apply to a walking surface. Walking surfaces steeper than specified in the definition are subject to the ramp requirements in Sections 1012 and 1030.

RAMP, EXIT ACCESS. See “Exit access ramp.”

RAMP, EXTERIOR EXIT. See “Exterior exit ramp.”

RAMP, INTERIOR EXIT. See “Interior exit ramp.”
RAMP-ACCESS OPEN PARKING
GARAGES. Open parking garages employing a series of continuously rising floors or a series of interconnecting ramps between floors permitting the movement of vehicles under their own power from and to the street level.

These types of garages employ vehicular ramps or sloped tiers that connect all of the levels of the structure. Whether the vehicles are self-parked or employee parked is immaterial.

RECORD DRAWINGS. Drawings (“as built”) that document the location of all devices, appliances, wiring sequences, wiring methods and connections of the components of a fire alarm system as installed.

To verify that the system has been installed to comply with the code and applicable referenced standards, complete as-built drawings of the fire alarm system must be available on site for review.

## REFLECTIVE PLASTIC CORE

INSULATION. An insulation material packaged in rolls, that is less than 12.5 mm thick, with not less than one exterior low-emittance surface (0.1 or less) and a core material containing voids or cells.

This is a product distinct from “foam plastic insulation.” Its unique properties dictate the need for a different testing procedure as specified in Section 2614.

REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL. An individual who is registered or licensed to practice their respective deign profession as defined by the Saudi Council of Engineers regulations.

REGISTERED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL IN RESPONSIBLE CHARGE. A registered design professional engaged by the owner or the owner's authorized agent to review and coordinate certain aspects of the project, as determined by the building official, for compatibility with the design of the building or structure, including submittal documents prepared by others, deferred submittal documents and phased submittal documents.

As required by Section 107.3.4, the owner or owner's authorized agent must designate a registered design professional where required by the laws applicable to the jurisdiction in which the building is constructed. The role of the registered design professional in responsible charge includes the review and coordination of the following items for compatibility with a project's design requirements:

1. Submittal documents prepared by others.

2 Deferred submittal documents.

3 Phases submittal documents.

===== Page 0148 =====
## 4 Special inspection reports.

RELIGIOUS WORSHIP, PLACE OF. A Mosque or a portion of building intended for prayers and/or other religious activities.

RELOCATABLE BUILDING. A partially or completely assembled building constructed and designed to be reused multiple times and transported to different building sites.

Unlike site-built buildings, which are typically intended to remain on their original site for the life of the building, relocatable modular buildings are designed and intended for relocation, reuse and/or repurposing. Many states have statutes that govern the building and relocating of relocatable modular buildings. For those that do not have state-mandated requirements, much confusion and inconsistency exists about the requirements for relocatable modular buildings as existing buildings.

The Modular Building Institute (MBI) (www.modular.org) estimates that there are over 600,000 code-compliant relocatable buildings in use in North America today. While it is impossible to determine the exact amount owned by the public at large, MBI estimates that public school districts across North America collectively own and operate about 180,000 relocatable classrooms, with the industry owning and leasing an additional 120,000. Additionally, the industry owns and leases approximately 280,000 relocatable buildings for various other business occupancies, including construction site offices and temporary sales offices.

There are unique attributes to relocatable modular buildings that warrant their own requirements in Section 3113. Requirements for relocatable modular buildings that are relocated have also been added to SBC 901, Chapter 14.

REPAIR. The reconstruction, replacement or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose of its maintenance or to correct damage.

As indicated in Section 105.1, permits are required for repairs. However, per Section 105.2.1, the emergency repair of an item typically does not require a permit before work can start. This definition makes it clear that repair is limited to work on the item for maintenance or to correct damage, and does not include complete or substantial replacement or other new work.

REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor vehicles.

Motor vehicle repair garages are classified in occupancy Group S-1. A repair garage may be part of a motor fuel-dispensing facility, but will still have its own specific requirements. Repair garages are regulated within Section 406.8.

REROOFING. The process of recovering or replacing an existing roof covering. See “Roof recover” and “Roof replacement.”

This term refers to the process of covering an existing roof system with a new roofing system (see Section 1511).

RESIDENTIAL AIRCRAFT HANGAR. An accessory building less than 185 m \( ^{2} \)  and 6 m in building height constructed on a one- or two-family property where aircraft are stored. Such use will be considered as a residential accessory use incidental to the dwelling.

A residential aircraft hangar is considered an accessory or auxiliary structure to a residential house similar to any other shed or detached garage. One- or two-family dwellings are required to be constructed in accordance with SBC 1101/1102 (see Section 101.2). Although that code is also applicable to accessory structures associated with one- or two-family dwellings, it is clear that Section 412.4 of the code was intended to control aircraft hangars since SBC 1101/1102 is silent on the subject. A residential aircraft hangar is limited to 185 m \( ^{2} \)  in area and 6 m in height. The hangar must be integral to a residential home on the same property. As such, the hangar would be considered the same as the private garage used to store the home's motor vehicles.

RESISTANCE FACTOR. A factor that accounts for deviations of the actual strength from the nominal strength and the manner and consequences of failure (also called “strength reduction factor”).

This definition is needed to apply material strength adjustments by way of the resistance factor that is specified in structural material chapters and referenced structural standards.

RESTRICTED ENTRANCE. An entrance that is made available for common use on a controlled basis, but not public use, and that is not a service entrance.

The key to this provision is that the entrance has a controlled access or some type of limiting basis. A sports facility where there is control at the entrance for ticket holders only, or a building with locked entrances, is not typically considered a restricted entrance (see the commentaries for the definitions of “Public entrance” and “Service entrance,” and to Section 1105.1.4).

RETRACTABLE AWNING. A retractable awning is a cover with a frame that retracts against a building or other structure to which it is entirely supported.

The key to this definition is that it provides for an element of building construction that is

===== Page 0149 =====
popular in residential construction. Retractable awnings are a subcategory of awnings, and therefore are included in the regulations in Section 3105.

RISK CATEGORY. A categorization of buildings and other structures for determination of flood, wind and earthquake loads based on the risk associated with unacceptable performance.

Risk category is a classification given to all buildings in Section 1604.5 based on the nature of the occupancy. This classification serves as a threshold for earthquake, flood and wind load requirements (also see the definition of "Essential facilities" and the commentary to Section 1604.5).

RISK-TARGETED MAXIMUM CONSIDERED EARTHQUAKE (MCER) GROUND MOTION RESPONSE

ACCELERATIONS. The most severe earthquake effects considered by this code, determined for the orientation that results in the largest maximum response to horizontal ground motions and with adjustment for targeted risk.

This term refers to the mapped earthquake ground motions that are provided in Figure 1613.2.1(1) and Figure 1613.2.1(2) for a Site Class B (rock) soil profile. It reflects the maximum level of earthquake ground shaking that is considered reasonable for the design of new structures.

ROOF ASSEMBLY (For application to Chapter 15 only). A system designed to provide weather protection and resistance to design loads. The system consists of a roof covering and roof deck or a single component serving as both the roof covering and the roof deck. A roof assembly can include an underlayment, a thermal barrier, insulation or a vapor retarder.

With respect to its application as it relates to Chapter 15, a roof assembly is an assembly of interacting roof components (including the roof deck) designed to weatherproof and, normally, to insulate a building's top surface.

ROOF COATING. A fluid-applied, adhered coating used for roof maintenance or roof repair, or as a component of a roof covering system or roof assembly.

This definition helps distinguish a specific category of roofing action or material. It helps in determining the appropriate category of action and whether a permit is required.

ROOF COVERING. The covering applied to the roof deck for weather resistance, fire classification or appearance.

This definition identifies the specific membrane of the entire roof system that provides weather protection and any required resistance to exterior fire exposure. The code has specific performance and prescriptive requirements for this covering to provide a durable, weather-resistant surface for the entire structure. A roof covering is considered the membrane that provides the weather-resistance and fire-performance characteristics required by the code.

ROOF COVERING SYSTEM. See “Roof assembly.”

ROOF DECK. The flat or sloped surface constructed on top of the exterior walls of a building or other supports for the purpose of enclosing the story below, or sheltering an area, to protect it from the elements, not including its supporting members or vertical supports.

A roof deck is the structural surface to which the roofing and waterproofing system (including insulation) is applied.

ROOF DRAINAGE, POSITIVE. See “Positive roof drainage.”

ROOF RECOVER. The process of installing an additional roof covering over a prepared existing roof covering without removing the existing roof covering.

This term refers to the process of covering an existing roof system with a new roofing system.

ROOF REPAIR. Reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing roof for the purposes of its maintenance.

Roofs should be maintained for the purpose of protection. If a section is damaged, then it should be repaired immediately.

ROOF REPLACEMENT. The process of removing the existing roof covering, repairing any damaged substrate and installing a new roof covering.

This definition refers to the process of covering an existing roof system with a new roofing system.

ROOF VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, attics, cathedral ceilings or other enclosed spaces over which a roof assembly is installed.

Ventilation of the attic prevents moisture condensation on cold surfaces and, therefore, will prevent dry rot on the bottom surface of shingles or wood roof decks.

ROOFTOP STRUCTURE. A structure erected on top of the roof deck or on top of any part of a building.

This definition includes all appurtenances constructed and located above the surrounding roof surfaces. These items (water tanks or cooling towers) or architectural features (spires

===== Page 0150 =====
or cupolas) are regulated by specific code provisions.

RUNNING BOND. The placement of masonry units such that head joints in successive courses are horizontally offset at least one-quarter the unit length.

Commentary Figure 202(36) illustrates the required overlap for running bonds. The minimum overlap is necessary to provide strength between units where masonry spans horizontally. Masonry not laid in running bond is often referred to as "stack bond" construction.

SALLYPORT. A security vestibule with two or more doors or gates where the intended purpose is to prevent continuous and unobstructed passage by allowing the release of only one door or gate at a time.

While sallyports are not unique to Group I-3 occupancies, they are essential to the control and safe movement of inmates in a Group I-3 facility. Section 408.3.7 allows sallyports to be in the means of egress system. See the commentary to that section for an additional description of sallyport design and use.

SCISSOR STAIRWAY. Two interlocking stairways providing two separate paths of egress located within one exit enclosure.

A scissor or interlocking stairway is sometimes used in high-rise buildings or to increase exit capacity of a stairwell enclosure. In this configuration, two independent stairway paths are located within the same exit enclosure and may or may not be visually open to one another. Where interlocking stairways are separated from each other with compliant fire barriers and horizontal assemblies, they are not considered scissor stairways (see Sections 403.5.1, 403.5.2 and 1007.1.1).

SCUPPER. An opening in a wall or parapet that allows water to drain from a roof.

These devices are for the purpose of allowing overflowing water to drain off the roof. These devices are commonly larger than the roof drain.

SECONDARY STRUCTURAL MEMBERS. The following structural members shall be considered secondary members and not part of the primary structural frame:

1 Structural members not having direct connections to the columns.

2 Members of the floor construction and roof construction not having direct connections to the columns.

3 Bracing members that are not designated as part of a primary structural frame or bearing wall.
This term works in conjunction with the term “primary structural frame” to distinguish the level of fire-resistance protection needed by various elements of a building’s structure. These requirements are found in Table 601 and Section 704.

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORY. A classification assigned to a structure based on its risk category and the severity of the design earthquake ground motion at the site.

The first step in the design of a structure for earthquake forces is the determination of its seismic design category. Each building is assigned the more restrictive seismic design category classification depending upon the site soil profile, the mapped spectral response accelerations at the site and the nature of the uses that occupy the building, using both Table 1613.3.5(1) and Table 1613.3.5(2). The following outlines the procedure used to determine a structure's seismic design category.

Step 1: Determine the mapped maximum considered earthquake spectral response acceleration at short periods, Ss, and at 1-second period, S1, for the site location from Figure 1613.2.1(1) and Figure 1613.2.1(2).

Step 2: Determine the (soil) site class in accordance with Section 1613.2.2.

Step 3: Determine the site coefficients,  \( F_{a} \)  and  \( F_{v} \) , from Figure 1613.2.1(1) and Figure 1613.2.1(2), respectively.

Step 4: Determine the 5-percent damped design spectral response acceleration at short periods, SDs, and at 1-second period, SD₁, as follows:

 \[ \begin{aligned}&S_{D5}=\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)(F_{a})(S_{s})\\&S_{D1}=\left(\frac{2}{3}\right)(F_{v})(S_{1})\\ \end{aligned} \]

Step 5: Determine the seismic design category as prescribed by Table 1613.3.5(1) and Table 1613.3.5(2). The highest of the seismic design categories from the two tables is the category assigned to the building, unless Section 1613.2.5.1 is applicable. For example, where the seismic design category from Table 1613.3.5(1) is D and from Table 1613.3.5(2) it is C, then the building would be assigned to Seismic Design Category D.

SEISMIC FORCE-RESISTING SYSTEM. That part of the structural system that has been considered in the design to provide the required resistance to the prescribed seismic forces.

This definition is needed for the correct application of special inspections of seismic force-resisting systems. Unless classified as Seismic Design Category A, the type of seismic-force-resisting system must be selected to conform to Section 12.2 of SBC.

===== Page 0151 =====
301. Providing a level of detailing that is appropriate for the selected system is critical to complying with the code's earthquake provisions.

SELF-CLOSING. As applied to a fire door or other opening protective, means equipped with a device that will ensure closing after having been opened.

A self-closing opening protective refers to a fire or smoke door assembly equipped with a listed closer for doors that must be maintained in the normally closed position. When the door is opened and released, the self-closing feature returns the door to the closed position. It is important to distinguish between the terms "self-closing" and "automatic closing" because they are not interchangeable. "Automatic closing" refers to an opening protective that is normally in the open position (see Section 716.2.6.4). Opening protectives with automatic closers are often held open and then returned to the closed position upon activation of fire detectors or smoke detectors or loss of power, which automatically releases the hold-open device and allows the door to close.

SELF-LUMINOUS. Illuminated by a self-contained power source, other than batteries, and operated independently of external power sources.

Self-luminous products do not need an outside light source to charge them like photoluminescent materials do. Products utilized to meet the requirements for luminous egress path markings in high-rise buildings (see Sections 403.5.5 and 1025) or exit signs (see Section 1013.5) may be photoluminescent or self-luminous. A variety of materials can comply with the referenced standards for egress path markings (UL 1994 and ASTM E2072) and for signs (UL 924).

SELF-PRESERVATION, INCAPABLE OF. See “Incapable of self-preservation.”

SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing personal property on a self-service basis.

A portion or space within these facilities can be rented by persons to store personal property. Movement of items into and out of the space is handled by the individual.

SERVICE CORRIDOR. A fully enclosed passage used for transporting HPM and purposes other than required means of egress.

Though HPM facility occupants may be exposed to limited HPM quantities during the course of their employment, their means of egress are protected from the HPM hazards by confining the HPM being transferred to its own passageway. A service corridor is only required where the HPM must be carried from a storage room or external area to a fabrication area through a passageway.

SERVICE ENTRANCE. An entrance intended primarily for delivery of goods or services.

This entrance is utilized primarily for accepting or sending deliveries of goods and services. Often this entrance is directly associated with a loading dock and is not considered a public or restricted entrance (see the commentaries to the definitions of “Service entrance” and “Public entrance” and to Section 1105.1.6).

SHAFT. An enclosed space extending through one or more stories of a building, connecting vertical openings in successive floors, or floors and roof.

Shafts are successive openings in the floors. A shaft is required to be enclosed with fire-resistance-rated assemblies to help prevent the vertical spread of fire and resist the spread of products of combustion from story to story. Provisions for vertical shafts are found in Section 713. These provisions are applicable to vertical openings required to be enclosed in fire-resistant shaft construction, such as for elevators and enclosed exit stairways.

SHAFT ENCLOSURE. The walls or construction forming the boundaries of a shaft.

Fire-resistance-rated walls forming shaft enclosures must be constructed as fire barrier walls in accordance with Section 707. Usually, vertical ducts penetrating multiple floors or buildings are required to be in shaft enclosures. Unlike a common chase wall, a shaft wall must be fire-resistance rated from the room side and from the shaft side.

SHALLOW FOUNDATION. A shallow foundation is an individual or strip footing, a mat foundation, a slab-on-grade foundation or a similar foundation element.

Chapter 18 identifies two major classifications for foundations: either shallow or deep. This definition clarifies the type of foundations that are considered to be shallow foundations. All others are, by default, considered to be deep foundations.

SHEAR WALL. This definition applies only to Chapter 23. A wall designed to resist lateral forces parallel to the plane of a wall.

Shear walls are the supporting elements for the lateral forces that are applied to a floor or roof diaphragm. They function structurally to provide a path for these loads to the foundation. Typically in wood framing these walls are framed with studs and have wood structural panel sheathing attached to the outside using specific nailing patterns to provide the necessary strength and stiffness. They also may have a tie-down attached at

===== Page 0152 =====
either or both ends of the wall to prevent overturning. Guidance for design of wood shear walls can be found in APA Research Report 154.

SHEAR WALL, PERFORATED. A wood structural panel sheathed wall with openings, that has not been specifically designed and detailed for force transfer around openings.

This term refers to shear walls that are designed by using the provisions of ANSI/AWC Special Design Provisions for Wind and Seismic (SDPWS) as an alternative to the traditional segmented shear wall design methodology. Aspect ratio limits apply to shear wall segments within the perforated shear wall as described by the definition of "Perforated shear wall segment." This method of shear wall design utilizes empirically determined reductions of wood structural panel shear wall capacities that are based on the maximum opening height, as well as the percentage of a particular shear wall that qualifies as a perforated shear wall segment. This method recognizes the strength and stiffness of sheathed areas above and below openings without the need to specifically design and detail for force transfer around the openings. It is not expected that sheathed wall areas above and below openings behave as coupling beams acting end to end, but rather that they provide local restraint at their ends. As a consequence, significantly reduced capacities are attributed to interior perforated shear wall segments with limited overturning restraint. Further background on the development of provisions for perforated shear walls and example problems are provided by the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program in (NEHRP) Recommended Provisions for Seismic Regulations for New Buildings and Other Structures, Part 2 Commentary (FEMA 450-2). Other resources and articles on perforated shear wall design are available from the American Wood Council at www.awc.org.

SHEAR WALL SEGMENT, PERFORATED. A section of shear wall with full-height sheathing that meets the height-to-width ratio limits of Section 4.3.4 of AWC SDPWS.

This term refers to a fully sheathed portion of a perforated shear wall that also meets the limit on height-to-width ratio. Only these portions of the perforated shear wall are considered in determining the percentage of full-height sheathing.

SHINGLE FASHION. A method of installing roof or wall coverings, water-resistive barriers, flashing or other building components such that upper layers of material are placed overlapping lower layers of material to provide for drainage via gravity and moisture control.

This term is used to describe the required method of applying moisture control layers such as roof underlayment and water-resistive barriers to the building. The intent is to direct the user to place upper layers of material lapping over lower layers of material, in the fashion of placing roof shingles, so moisture is provided with a clear path to drain down and away from the building.

SINGLE-PLY MEMBRANE. A roofing membrane that is field applied using one layer of membrane material (either homogeneous or composite) rather than multiple layers.

This is a flexible or semi-flexible roof covering or waterproofing layer, whose primary function is the exclusion of water.

SINGLE-STATION SMOKE ALARM. An assembly incorporating the detector, the control equipment and the alarm-sounding device in one unit, operated from a power supply either in the unit or obtained at the point of installation.

A single-station smoke alarm is a self-contained alarm device that detects visible or invisible particles of combustion. Its function is to detect a fire in the immediate area of the detector location. Single-station smoke alarms are individual units with the capability to stand alone. Where single-station smoke alarms are interconnected with other single-station devices, they would be considered a multiple-station smoke alarm system. Single-station smoke alarms are not capable of notifying or controlling any other fire protection equipment or systems. They may be battery powered, directly connected to the building power supply, or a combination of both. Single-station smoke alarms must be built to comply with UL 217, and are to be installed as required by Section 907.2.11.

SITE. A parcel of land bounded by a lot line or a designated portion of a public right-of-way.

A site, for purposes of accessibility requirements, is the same as that which is considered in the application of other code requirements. The property within the boundaries of the site is under the control of the owner. The owner can be held responsible for code compliance of the site and all facilities on it. Legal property lines do not always constitute site boundaries (e.g., malls, condominiums, townhouses). A site could contain multiple legal "lot" divisions.

SITE CLASS. A classification assigned to a site based on the types of soils present and their engineering properties as defined in Section 1613.2.2.

This definition is necessary because the earthquake load on a structure is greatly

===== Page 0153 =====
affected by the soil at the site. There are six site classes in the provisions that are referenced in Section 1613.2.2.

SITE COEFFICIENTS. The values of  \( F_{a} \)  and  \( F_{v} \)  indicated in Table 1613.2.3(1) and Table 1613.2.3(2), respectively.

The site coefficients  \( F_{a} \)  and  \( F_{v} \)  are used to adjust the mapped ground motions to account for the characteristics of the site's soil profile when determining the soil-adjusted earthquake spectral response accelerations in Section 1613.2.3. These coefficients are functions of the soil (site class), as well as the seismicity at the site of the structure.

SITE-FABRICATED STRETCH SYSTEM. A system, fabricated on site and intended for acoustical, tackable or aesthetic purposes, that is composed of three elements:

1 A frame (constructed of plastic, wood, metal or other material) used to hold fabric in place.

2 A core material (infill, with the correct properties for the application).

3 An outside layer, composed of a textile, fabric or vinyl, that is stretched taut and held in place by tension or mechanical fasteners via the frame.

Site-fabricated stretch systems are interior finish materials that are pulled taut across walls or ceilings with a frame that holds a fabric and core. These systems are now being used extensively because they can stretch to cover decorative walls and ceilings with unusual looks and shapes. The systems consist of three parts: a fabric (or vinyl) outer layer, a frame and an infill core material. This type of product is not exclusive to any particular manufacturer. It is important to point out that these materials are not curtains or drapes because they are not free hanging (see commentary, Section 803.10).

SKYLIGHT, UNIT. A factory-assembled, glazed fenestration unit, containing one panel of glazing material that allows for natural lighting through an opening in the roof assembly while preserving the weather-resistant barrier of the roof.

This is a specific type of sloped glazing assembly that is factory assembled. The code contains specific provisions that are appropriate for this type of building component. Factory-assembled units, as opposed to site-built skylights, can be designed, tested and rated as one component that incorporates both glazing and framing, where applicable. The individual components of site-built glazing must be designed to resist the design loads of the codes individually, and are not usually rated as an assembly. Skylights must also meet thermal resistance standards of the IECCO or its equivalent in SBC 601/602.

SKYLIGHTS AND SLOPED GLAZING. Glass or other transparent or translucent glazing material installed at a slope of 15 degrees or more from vertical. Unit skylights, tubular daylighting devices, glazing materials, solariums, sunrooms, roofs and sloped walls are included in this definition.

The code regulates skylights and sloped glazing since their failure could result in injury and building damage (see Section 2405 for the code requirements). The definition provides other terms used for fenestration in this category. Fenestration is a key element in a building's thermal envelope.

SLEEPING UNIT. A single unit that provides rooms or spaces for one or more persons, includes permanent provisions for sleeping and can include provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.

This definition is included to coordinate the Fair Housing Act guidelines with the code. The definition for “Sleeping unit” clarifies the differences between sleeping units and dwelling units. In addition, using the term “sleeping unit” for spaces where people sleep will replace a multitude of other terms (e.g., patient room, cell, guestroom) so that there is consistent application across occupancies. Some examples of sleeping units are hotel guest rooms; bedrooms in different types of congregate living facilities; patient sleeping rooms in hospitals, nursing homes or assisted living facilities; or housing cells in a jail. Another example would be a studio apartment with a kitchenette (i.e., countertop microwave, sink, refrigerator). Since the cooking arrangements are not the traditional permanent appliances (i.e., a range), this configuration would be considered a sleeping unit and not a dwelling unit. As defined in the code, a “Dwelling unit” must contain permanent facilities for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

SMOKE ALARM. A single- or multiple-station alarm responsive to smoke. See “Multiple-station smoke alarm” and “Single-station smoke alarm.”

This is a general term that applies to both single- and multiple-station smoke alarms that are not part of an automatic fire detection system. It is the generic term for any device that both detects the products of combustion and initiates an alarm signal for occupant notification.

SMOKE BARRIER. A continuous membrane, either vertical or horizontal, such as a wall, floor or ceiling assembly, that is designed and constructed

===== Page 0154 =====
to restrict the movement of smoke.

A smoke barrier is a fire-resistance-rated assembly that is different from a fire partition, fire barrier or fire wall. Smoke barriers include walls and floor/ceiling assemblies that are constructed with a 1-hour fire resistance rating and are one of the components in a smoke compartment. In Group I-2 and I-3 occupancies, the smoke barriers are intended to create adjacent smoke compartments to which building occupants can be safely and promptly relocated during a fire, thus preventing the need to have complete and immediate egress from the building. For these occupancies, complete egress from the building would not be practical in most cases, due to restrictions on the mobility of the occupants. To maintain tenability in the adjacent smoke compartment, the smoke barrier is therefore intended to resist the spread of fire and hinder the movement of smoke. Smoke barriers are also used to compartment a building into separate smoke control zones where using the provisions of Section 909. The construction requirements for a smoke barrier provide resistance to the transmission of smoke [see Commentary Figure 202(37) and Section 709].

SMOKE COMPARTMENT. A space within a building separated from other interior areas of the building by smoke barriers, including interior walls and horizontal assemblies.

Smoke compartments create spaces that protect occupants from the products of combustion produced by a fire in an adjacent smoke compartment and restrict smoke to the compartment of fire origin.

SMOKE DAMPER. A listed device installed in ducts and air transfer openings designed to resist the passage of smoke. The device is installed to operate automatically, controlled by a smoke detection system, and where required, is capable of being positioned from a fire command center.

Similar to a fire damper, smoke dampers are intended to restrict the passage of smoke through ducts or openings in structural assemblies such as smoke barriers and corridor walls. They are also installed in smoke control systems. The smoke leakage rates of these devices are used to classify them in accordance with UL 555S. See also the commentary to the definition for "Fire damper."

SMOKE DETECTOR. A listed device that senses visible or invisible particles of combustion.

These devices are considered early-warning devices and have saved many people from smoke inhalation and burns. Smoke detectors have a wide range of uses, from sophisticated fire detection systems for industrial and commercial uses to residential. A smoke detector is a device, typically listed in accordance with UL 268, that activates a fire alarm system. These system smoke detectors contain only the components required to detect the products of combustion and activate a fire alarm system and are, therefore, different from single- and multiple-station smoke alarms.

Smoke detectors typically consist of two types: ionization and photoelectric. An ionization detector contains a small amount of radioactive material that ionizes the air in a sensing chamber and causes a current to flow through the air between two charged electrodes. When smoke enters the chamber, the particles cause a reduction in the current. When the level of conductance decreases to a preset level, the detector responds with an alarm.

A photoelectric smoke detector consists primarily of a light source, a light beam and a photosensitive device. When smoke particles enter the light beam, they reduce the light intensity in the photosensitive device. When obscuration reaches a preset level, the detector initiates an alarm.

SMOKE PARTITION. A wall assembly that extends from the top of the foundation or floor below to the underside of the floor or roof sheathing, deck or slab above or to the underside of the ceiling above where the ceiling membrane is constructed to limit the transfer of smoke.

This term represents wall assemblies that are constructed, in accordance with Section 710, to resist the passage of smoke. Unless required elsewhere in the code, smoke partitions do not require a fire-resistance rating. An example of this would be where a smoke partition is also a corridor wall that requires a fire-resistance rating. In this case, the partition would need to meet all requirements applicable to smoke partitions and fire partitions.

SMOKE-DEVELOPED INDEX. A comparative measure, expressed as a dimensionless number, derived from measurements of smoke obscuration versus time for a material tested in accordance with ASTM E84.

The ASTM E84 test method of measuring the density of smoke emitted from combustible materials determines the smoke-developed index. This value is only comparative and provides only a relative understanding of the smoke generation potential of a material. The smoke-developed index is sometimes abbreviated as SDI.

SMOKEPROOF ENCLOSURE. An exit stairway or ramp designed and constructed so that the movement of the products of combustion produced by a fire occurring in any part of the building into the enclosure is limited.

===== Page 0155 =====
A smokeproof enclosure is intended to provide an effective barrier to the entry of smoke into an exit stairway, thereby offering an additional level of protection for occupants of high-rise and underground structures.

## SMOKE-PROTECTED ASSEMBLY

SEATING. Seating served by means of egress that is not subject to smoke accumulation within or under a structure for a specified design time by means of passive design or by mechanical ventilation.

An example of smoke-protected assembly seating is an indoor arena with a smoke control system. The intent is to separate this from open-air seating such as an outdoor grandstand. The code has less-stringent requirements for certain aspects of smoke-protected and open-air assembly seating than for seating that is not smoke protected, since occupants are subject to less hazard from the accumulation of smoke and fumes during a fire event. For example, an assembly dead-end aisle is permitted to be longer for a smoke-protected assembly area. For smoke control system requirements, see Section 909.

## SOFT CONTAINED PLAY EQUIPMENT

STRUCTURE. A play structure containing one or more components where the user enters a play environment that utilizes pliable materials.

This definition helps the proper application of provisions for play structures found in Section 424. An example is a play structure made of one or more components, on which an individual enters a fully enclosed play environment that uses pliable materials such as webbing, padding and fabric. This would be applicable to play structures for adults or children.

SOLID. A material that has a melting point, decomposes or sublimes at a temperature greater than  \( 20^{\circ} \) C.

The temperature at which a solid melts is the melting point. A material will begin to melt as heat is added to it and, thus, eventually change to a liquid state.

SPECIAL AMUSEMENT BUILDING. A special amusement area is any temporary or permanent building or portion thereof that is occupied for amusement, entertainment or educational purposes and is arranged in a manner that:

1 Makes the means of egress path not readily apparent due to visual or audio distractions.

2 Intentionally confounds identification of the means of egress path.

3 Otherwise makes the means of egress path not readily available because of the nature of the attraction or mode of conveyance through the building or structure.
In general, a special amusement area is a building or portion thereof in which people gather (thus, an assembly occupancy) and in which egress is either not readily apparent due to distractions, is intentionally confounded (e.g., a maze) or is not readily available. The definition includes all such facilities, including portable and temporary structures. The hazard associated with such buildings is not related to the permanence or length of use; therefore, seasonal uses (such as haunted houses at Halloween) and portable uses (carnival rides) are included where they meet the criteria in the definition.

SPECIAL EVENT STRUCTURE. Any ground-supported structure, platform, stage, stage scaffolding or rigging, canopy, tower or similar structure supporting entertainment-related equipment or signage.

Special event structures are now included in the types of temporary structures that are regulated by both SBC 201 and SBC 801. This definition would be applicable to stages for concerts or platforms for speakers as well as any structures that would hold curtains, screens, lighting or sound equipment that are part of the event happening on the stage. If there is a shade canopy for the stage, that would be covered too.

SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. These areas are as A-Zones or V-Zones.

SPECIAL INSPECTION. Inspection of construction requiring the expertise of an approved special inspector in order to ensure compliance with this code and the approved construction documents.

This category of inspection is intended to apply to those material installations that require a special level of knowledge and attention. For example, special inspections are required for the installation of high-strength bolts, welded connections, concrete reinforcement, prestressed concrete, fabrication of laminated wood structural elements and pile installations to comply with the contract documents and the standards under which they are assembled.

CONTINUOUS SPECIAL INSPECTION. Special inspection by the special inspector who is present continuously when and where the work to be inspected is being performed.

Continuous special inspection is the constant monitoring by a special inspector of specific tasks. These inspections must be carried out continuously over the duration of the particular tasks. "Full-time" should not be construed as

===== Page 0156 =====
requiring the special inspector to be present when these tasks are not being performed.

PERIODIC SPECIAL INSPECTION. Special inspection by the special inspector who is intermittently present where the work to be inspected has been or is being performed.

Periodic special inspection allows intermittent monitoring of specified tasks designated in the statement of special inspections as requiring periodic inspection. To avoid misunderstandings, the frequency or timing of these inspections should be established before a permit is issued.

SPECIAL INSPECTOR. A qualified person employed or retained by an approved agency and approved by the building official as having the competence necessary to inspect a particular type of construction requiring special inspection.

This definition facilitates the application of Chapter 17. A qualified person could be an individual with experience, training or certifications related to the specific items subject to special inspection.

SPECIFIED COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF MASONRY,  \( f_{m} \) . Minimum compressive strength, expressed as force per unit of net cross-sectional area, required of the masonry used in construction by the approved construction documents, and upon which the project design is based. Whenever the quantity  \( f_{m} \)  is under the radical sign, the square root of numerical value only is intended, and the result has units of MPa.

Engineered design of structural masonry is based on the specified compressive strength of the masonry,  \( f_{m} \) . This specified strength is required to be shown on the approved construction documents. Strength of the constructed masonry, determined by the unit strength method or prism strength method, is required to equal or exceed the specified compressive strength of masonry.

SPLICE. The result of a factory and/or field method of joining or connecting two or more lengths of a fire-resistant joint system into a continuous entity.

In many instances, the actual length of a joint required to be protected by a fire-resistant joint system exceeds the length of the joint system, especially where a prefabricated system is used. Where two or more lengths of a joint system are necessary to protect a joint, the ends of each section must be joined by a splice to maintain the fire-resistive integrity of the assembly. Splices may be either factory or field installed, but in either case, the splice must be tested in accordance with UL 2079.

SPORT ACTIVITY, AREA OF. See “Area of sport activity.”
SPRAY ROOM. A room designed to accommodate spraying operations.

When, because of size or for economic reasons, spray booths are insufficient, an entire room is dedicated to the spraying process. In many cases, the over sprayed flammable/combustible liquids are allowed to remain on the floor until cleaned. These rooms have specific ventilation requirements to prevent the accumulation of vapors at the floor. See the commentary to Section 416 for further discussion of spray rooms.

SPRAY-APPLIED FOAM PLASTIC. Single-and multiple-component, spray-applied foam plastic insulation used in nonstructural applications that are installed at locations wherein the material is applied in a liquid or frothied state, permitted to free rise and cure in situ.

Spray-applied foam plastic is made by mixing chemicals to create a foam. Those chemicals react and expand to create foam that is used to insulate or work as an air seal or moisture barrier at cracks around openings, seams and joints. See the commentary to Section 2603.1.1.

SPRAYED FIRE-RESISTANT MATERIALS. Cementitious or fibrous materials that are sprayed to provide fire-resistant protection of the substrates.

The cementitious or fibrous material is pneumatically projected onto a surface such that the density, thickness and cohesion/adhesion of the material will provide fire resistance to the surface.

STAGE. A space within a building utilized for entertainment or presentations, which includes overhead hanging curtains, drops, scenery or stage effects other than lighting and sound.

The building feature known as a “stage” is defined as the area or space where the performers are located. The presentation area is usually elevated to provide clear sightlines for the audience. The stage area also includes the wing areas and backstage areas where curtains and scenery are placed.

STAIR. A change in elevation, consisting of one or more risers.

All steps, even a single step, are defined as a stair. This makes the stair requirements applicable to all steps unless specifically exempt in the code.

STAIRWAY. One or more flights of stairs, either exterior or interior, with the necessary landings and platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one level to another.

It is important to note that this definition characterizes a stairway as connecting one level to another. The term “level” is not to be

===== Page 0157 =====
confused with "story." Steps that connect two levels, one of which is not considered a "story" of the structure, would be considered a stairway. For example, a set of steps between the basement level in an areaway and the outside ground level would be considered a stairway. A series of steps between the floor of a story and a mezzanine within that story would also be considered a stairway (see definitions for "Flight," "Exit access stairway," "Exterior exit stairway," "Interior exit stairway" and Sections 1011, 1019, 1023 and 1027).

STAIRWAY, EXIT ACCESS. See “Exit access stairway.”

STAIRWAY, EXTERIOR EXIT. See “Exterior exit stairway.”

STAIRWAY, INTERIOR EXIT. See “Interior exit stairway.”

STAIRWAY, SCISSOR. See “Scissor stairway.”

STAIRWAY, SPIRAL. A stairway having a closed circular form in its plan view with uniform section-shaped treads attached to and radiating from a minimum-diameter supporting column.

Spiral stairways are permitted as part of a means of egress in limited circumstances given in Section 1011.10, along with the requirements. Spiral staircases could be used for supplemental/convenience stairways in other locations. Spiral stairways are commonly used where a small number of occupants use the stairway and the floor space for the stair is very limited. Spiral stairways are typically supported by a center pole.

STANDBY POWER SYSTEM. A source of automatic electric power of a required capacity and duration to operate required building, hazardous materials or ventilation systems in the event of a failure of the primary power. Standby power systems are required for electrical loads where interruption of the primary power could create hazards or hamper rescue or fire-fighting operations.

Section 2702 of the code mandates the installation of emergency power systems and standby power systems for various buildings and occupancies in accordance with SBC 801, NFPA 70 (or its equivalent in SBC 401) and NFPA, 110 and 111. This definition is consistent with definitions in NFPA 110 and NFPA 111 and is intended to provide clarity for the fire code official as to which systems are considered to be standby power systems. A primary difference between emergency and standby power systems is that emergency power systems are essentially life safety systems (e.g., exit signage and egress illumination), whereas standby power systems focus more on the continued operation of critical equipment in a building (e.g., elevators, fire pumps). Another difference between the two is the time limit within which the power supply activates. More specifically, emergency power is available in 10 seconds after primary power fails, whereas standby power is available in 60 seconds. Both types of systems are required to operate for a minimum of two hours under full design load unless otherwise indicated in Section 2702. Standby power systems are required for the following systems or features, among others:

1 Elevator and platform lift operation.

2 Emergency responder radio coverage systems.
3 Horizontal sliding exit doors.
4 Smoke control systems.
5 High-rise building fire command centers.
See also the commentary to Section 202, the definition of “Emergency power system” and Section 2702.

STANDPIPE, TYPES OF. Standpipe types are as follows:

Section 905 recognizes five types of standpipe systems. The use of each type of system depends on specific occupancy conditions and the presence of an automatic sprinkler system. For a further discussion of standpipe classes and types, see the commentary to Section 905.

AUTOMATIC DRY. A dry standpipe system, normally filled with pressurized air, that is arranged through the use of a device, such as dry pipe valve, to admit water into the system piping automatically upon the opening of a hose valve. The water supply for an automatic dry standpipe system shall be capable of supplying the system demand.

A typical automatic dry standpipe system has an automatic water supply retained by a dry pipe valve. The dry pipe valve clapper is kept in place by air placed in the standpipe system under pressure. Once a standpipe hose valve is opened, the air is released from the system, allowing water to fill the system through the dry pipe valve. This system is traditionally used in areas where the temperature falls below  \( 4^{\circ} \) C, where a wet system could freeze and possibly burst the pipe or simply be unavailable when needed.

AUTOMATIC WET. A wet standpipe system that has a water supply that is capable of supplying the system demand automatically.

An automatic wet standpipe system is used in locations where the entire system would remain above  \( 4^{\circ} \) C. Because the system is pressurized with water, an immediate release of water occurs when a hose connection valve is opened. This is the most generally preferred

===== Page 0158 =====
type of standpipe but it is not necessarily the required type unless so stipulated.

MANUAL DRY. A dry standpipe system that does not have a permanent water supply attached to the system. Manual dry standpipe systems require water from a fire department pumper to be pumped into the system through the fire department connection in order to meet the system demand.

A manual dry standpipe system is filled with water only when the fire service is present. Typically, the fire service connects the discharge from a water source, such as a pumper truck, to the fire department connection of a manual dry standpipe system. When the fire service has suppressed the fire and is preparing to leave, the system is drained of the remaining water. Manual dry standpipe systems are commonly installed in open parking structures.

MANUAL WET. A wet standpipe system connected to a water supply for the purpose of maintaining water within the system but does not have a water supply capable of delivering the system demand attached to the system. Manual-wet standpipe systems require water from a fire department pumper (or the like) to be pumped into the system in order to meet the system demand.

A manual wet standpipe system is connected to an automatic water supply, but the supply is not capable of providing the system demand. The manual wet system could be one that is connected with the sprinkler system such that it is capable of supplying the demand for the sprinkler system but not for the standpipe. The standpipe system demand is met when the fire service provides additional water through the fire department connection from the discharge of a water source, such as a pumper truck.

SEMIAUTOMATIC DRY. A dry standpipe system that is arranged through the use of a device, such as a deluge valve, to admit water into the system piping upon activation of a remote control device located at a hose connection. A remote control activation device shall be provided at each hose connection. The water supply for a semiautomatic dry standpipe system shall be capable of supplying the system demand.

This type of dry standpipe is a special design that uses a solenoid-activated valve to retain the automatic water supply. Once the standpipe hose valve is opened, a signal is sent to the deluge valve retaining the automatic water supply to allow water to fill the system. This kind of system is used in areas where the temperature falls below  \( 4^{\circ} \) C, where a wet system would otherwise freeze. As such, there is no semiautomatic wet system type.
STANDPIPE SYSTEM, CLASSES OF.
Standpipe classes are as follows:

A standpipe system is typically an arrangement of vertical piping located in exit stairways that allows fire-fighting personnel to connect hand-carried hoses at each level to manually extinguish fires. Section 905 and NFPA 14 recognize three different classes of standpipe systems. For a further discussion of standpipe classes and types, see the commentary to Section 905.

CLASS I SYSTEM. A system providing 65 mm hose connections to supply water for use by fire departments and those trained in handling heavy fire streams.

A Class I standpipe system is intended for use by trained fire service personnel as a readily available water source for manual fire-fighting operations. A Class I standpipe system is equipped with only 65 mm hose connections to allow the fire service to attach the appropriate hose and nozzles. A Class I standpipe system is not equipped with hose stations, which include a cabinet, hose and nozzle.

CLASS II SYSTEM. A system providing 40 mm hose stations to supply water for use primarily by the building occupants or by the fire department during initial response.

A Class II standpipe system is intended for use by building occupants or by the fire department for manual suppression. The hose stations defined in NFPA 14 as part of the Class II standpipe system include a hose rack, hose nozzle, hose and hose connection. The intent of providing the hose is for use by properly trained personnel. Occupant-use hose stations should only be provided where they can be used by people who have been properly trained in the use of the hose and nozzle.

Class III system. A system providing 40 mm hose stations to supply water for use by building occupants and 65 mm hose connections to supply a larger volume of water for use by fire departments and those trained in handling heavy fire streams.

A Class III standpipe system is intended for use by building occupants as well as trained fire service personnel. The 40 mm hose station is for use by the building occupants or fire department for manual fire suppression and the 65 mm hose connection is intended for use primarily by fire service personnel or those who have received training in the use of the larger hoses. Class III systems allow the fire department to select the types of hose necessary based on the fire hazard present where a fire is effectively controlled by an automatic sprinkler system, the smaller hose size may be all that is necessary for fire department mop-up operations.

STEEL CONSTRUCTION, COLD-FORMED.

===== Page 0159 =====
That type of construction made up entirely or in part of steel structural members cold formed to shape from sheet or strip steel such as roof deck, floor and wall panels, studs, floor joists, roof joists and other structural elements.

This definition is necessary to distinguish structural members of cold-formed steel from other types of steel elements. A distinguishing characteristic is that the forming operation takes place at room temperature without the addition of heat. Specific references to AISI standards and specifications applicable to cold-formed steel construction are provided in Sections 2210 and 2211.

STEEL ELEMENT, STRUCTURAL. Any steel structural member of a building or structure consisting of rolled shapes, pipe, hollow structural sections, plates, bars, sheets, rods or steel castings other than cold-formed steel or steel joint members.

This definition facilitates application of steel requirements, primarily in Chapter 22, by enabling the code user to distinguish structural steel elements from other types of steel elements. See the references to the AISC standards and specifications for structural steel that are provided in Section 2205.

STEEL JOIST. Any steel structural member of a building or structure made of hot-rolled or cold-formed solid or open-web sections, or riveted or welded bars, strip or sheet steel members, or slotted and expanded, or otherwise deformed rolled sections.

This definition is necessary to distinguish steel joists from other types of steel elements. References to SJI specifications are provided in Section 2207.

STEEP SLOPE. A roof slope 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (17-percent slope) or greater.

This is the general criterion for roof slope that is used throughout the code. Slope requirements for specific roof covering materials are specified in Chapter 15.

STONE MASONRY. Masonry composed of field, quarried or cast stone units bonded by mortar.

Stone masonry is composed of natural marble, limestone, granite, sandstone and slate for building purposes. Ashlar stone is further distinguished as coursed or random. Rubble stone masonry is further distinguished as coursed, random or rough.

STORAGE, HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. The keeping, retention or leaving of hazardous materials in closed containers, tanks, cylinders, or similar vessels; or vessels supplying operations through closed connections to the vessel.

This term refers to all hazardous materials that are essentially being stored in a static condition. The material is considered in use once it is placed into action by either handling or transport or in a closed or open system.
STORAGE RACKS, STEEL. Cold-formed or hot-rolled steel structural members which are formed into steel storage racks, including pallet storage racks, movable-shelf racks, rack-supported systems, automated storage and retrieval systems (stacker racks), push-back racks, pallet-flow racks, case-flow racks, pick modules and rack-supported platforms. Other types of racks, such as drive-in or drive-through racks, cantilever racks, portable racks or racks made of materials other than steel, are not considered storage racks for the purpose of this code.

This definition of storage rack is drawn from RMI MH 16.1 in order to facilitate application of code requirements for steel storage racks in Chapter 17 and 22.

## STORAGE RACKS, STEEL

CANTILEVERED. A framework or assemblage composed of cold-formed or hotrolled steel structural members, primarily in the form of vertical columns, extended bases, horizontal arms projecting from the faces of the columns, and longitudinal (down-aisle) bracing between columns. There may be shelf beams between the arms, depending on the products being stored; this definition does not include other types of racks such as pallet storage racks, drive in racks, drive-through racks, or racks made of materials other than steel.

This definition is consistent with SBC 301, Section 11.2 concerning steel storage racks. The word “cantilevered” acknowledges that this common type of storage rack has different loading and design requirements than a simple steel storage rack. Section 2209.2 specifically addresses the design of steel cantilevered storage racks. Section 1705.13.7, “Storage racks,” clarifies that periodic special inspection is required for steel storage racks, regular or cantilevered, that are 2.4 m or greater in height in Seismic Design Categories D, E or F.

STORM SHELTER. A building, structure or portions thereof, constructed in accordance with ICC 500 and designated for use during a severe windstorm event, such as a hurricane or tornado.

COMMUNITY STORM SHELTER. A storm shelter not defined as a “Residential storm shelter.” RESIDENTIAL STORM SHELTER. A storm shelter serving occupants of dwelling units and having an occupant load not exceeding 16 persons.

The significance of the definitions is to distinguish between residential shelters and community shelters. Residential shelters are somewhat more basic than community shelters. A residential shelter allows for less floor area per person than that required for a

===== Page 0160 =====
community shelter because the occupants are presumed to be more familiar with each other. A shelter that serves a group of dwelling units but where the capacity needs to be more than 16 persons would be considered a community storm shelter.

See Section 423 and ICC 500, Standard for the Design and Construction of Storm Shelters.

STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above (see "Basement," "Building height," "Grade plane" and "Mezzanine"). A story is measured as the vertical distance from top to top of two successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters.

All levels in a building that conform to this description are stories, including basements. A mezzanine is considered part of the story in which it is located. See Chapter 5 for code requirements regarding limitations on the number of stories in a building as a function of the type of construction.

STORY ABOVE GRADE PLANE. Any story having its finished floor surface entirely above grade plane, or in which the finished surface of the floor next above is:

1 More than 1.8 m above grade plane; or

2 More than 3.6 m above the finished ground level at any point.

The determination of the allowed height of a building under Section 504 is based on the number of stories above grade plane (see definitions of "Grade plane," "Height, building" and "Basement"). The code establishes by this definition which stories of a building are those above grade plane. Clearly, it includes those stories that are fully above grade plane. It also includes stories that may be partially below finished ground level, but the finished floor level is more than 1.8 m above grade plane. It also includes those floor levels that, due to an irregular terrain, have a finished floor level more than 3.6 m above finished ground level at any point surrounding the building. Any building level not qualifying as a story above grade plane is, by definition, a basement. See the commentaries for the definitions of "Grade plane," "Height, building" and "Basement" and Commentary Figure 202(7) and Figure 202(23) through Figure 202(27).

STRENGTH. This term is defined two ways, the first for use in Chapter 16 and the second for use in Chapter 21.

In masonry design under Chapter 21 of the code, the term "strength" is used in both general and specific senses. In the general sense, the strength of a member is its capacity to resist internal forces and moments. In the specific sense, strength is further categorized by type. The tensile strength of a member, for instance, refers to how much tensile force the member can support.

In the context of strength design, the force resulting from factored design actions is referred to as the "required strength." An approximation to the "minimum expected" strength of the member is referred to as the "nominal strength" (see the commentary to "Nominal strength"). This nominal strength is then multiplied by a strength reduction factor to account for material, design and construction variabilities to determine the design strength. The design strength must equal or exceed the required strength.

In the context of allowable stress design (ASD), the force resulting from unfactored design loads is referred to as the “applied (actual) force.” The anticipated strength would then be reduced by appropriate safety factors to either an allowable stress or an allowable strength (for example, for anchor bolts). This allowable stress or strength is required to equal or exceed the applied (actual) stress or force.

“Design strength,” “Nominal strength” and “Required strength” are defined in more detail immediately below. Allowable stresses and strengths are defined in SBC 305.

Strength can also refer to the load at which a test specimen fails (for example, prism strength).

## For Chapter 16:

NOMINAL STRENGTH. The capacity of a structure or member to resist the effects of loads, as determined by computations using specified material strengths and dimensions and equations derived from accepted principles of structural mechanics or by field tests or laboratory tests of scaled models, allowing for modeling effects and differences between laboratory and field conditions.

This definition is needed to apply the structural analysis and structural material design requirements in Chapter 16 and the structural materials requirements in Chapter 19 through 23.

REQUIRED STRENGTH. Strength of a member, cross section or connection required to resist factored loads or related internal moments and forces in such combinations as stipulated by these provisions.

This definition is needed to apply the structural analysis requirements in Chapter 16 and the structural material design requirements in Chapter 19 through 23.

STRENGTH DESIGN. A method of

===== Page 0161 =====
proportioning structural members such that the computed forces produced in the members by factored loads do not exceed the member design strength [also called “load and resistance factor design” (LRFD)]. The term “strength design” is used in the design of concrete and masonry structural elements.

This definition describes the strength design method, which is one of the design approaches recognized under the code in Section 1604.1. It is needed to apply the structural analysis requirements in Chapter 16 and the structural material design requirements in Chapter 19 through 23.
For Chapter 21:

Design strength. Nominal strength multiplied by a strength reduction factor.

The strength design procedures of Section 2108 use the term “design strength” to indicate a realistic capacity of a member considering material, design and construction variabilities. The design strength is obtained by multiplying the “nominal strength” by a strength reduction factor. The design strength must equal or exceed the “required strength.”

Nominal strength. Strength of a member or cross section calculated in accordance with these provisions before application of any strength-reduction factors.

The strength design procedures of Section 2108 use the term “nominal strength” to refer to the capacity of a masonry member, which is determined based on the assumptions contained in Section 2108. It is sometimes referred to as the “expected” strength of the member; however, this is a misnomer. The nominal strength would equal the expected strength where the masonry member was constructed of materials complying exactly with the minimum material requirements, design equations were perfect and construction tolerances were zero. Since material strengths commonly exceed minimum requirements, expected strength is often much higher than nominal strength. For instance, Grade 60 reinforcement often has a yield strength of around 455 MPa, even though the minimum specified yield strength requirement is 414 MPa. Therefore, the nominal strength is not the expected strength of the member, although it can be grossly classified as the minimum expected strength. Expected strength design is not included in Chapter 21 and is currently beyond the scope of the code. To determine the design strength, the nominal strength is multiplied by a strength reduction factor to account for material, design and construction variability. The design strength is required to equal or exceed the required strength.
Required strength. Strength of a member or cross section required to resist factored loads.

In the strength design of masonry (see Section 2108), the required strength is that which corresponds to the factored design loads on the structure. The design strength (nominal strength times the appropriate strength reduction factor) must equal or exceed the required strength.

## STRUCTURAL COMPOSITE LUMBER.

Structural member manufactured using wood elements bonded together with exterior adhesives. Examples of structural composite lumber are:

LAMINATED STRAND LUMBER (LSL). A composite of wood strand elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along the length of the member, where the least dimension of the wood strand elements is 2.5 mm or less and their average lengths not less than 150 times the least dimension of the wood strand elements.

LAMINATED VENEER LUMBER (LVL). A composite of wood veneer sheet elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along the length of the member, where the veneer element thicknesses are 6.5 mm or less.

ORIENTED STRAND LUMBER (OSL). A composite of wood strand elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along the length of the member, where the least dimension of the wood strand elements is 2.5 mm or less and their average lengths not less than 75 times and less than 150 times the least dimension of the strand elements.

PARALLEL STRAND LUMBER (PSL). A composite of wood strand elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along the length of the member where the least dimension of the wood strand elements is 6.5 mm or less and their average lengths not less than 300 times the least dimension of the wood strand elements.

This definition identifies which engineered wood products are considered structural composite lumber. This facilitates the application of the requirements of Section 2303.1.10, which references ASTM D5456 for determination of structural capacities. The four types are: laminated strand lumber (LSL), laminated veneer lumber (LVL), oriented strand lumber (OSL) and parallel strand lumber (PSL). LSL, OSL and PSL are a composite of wood strand elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along the length of the member. What distinguishes between the three is the least dimension of the wood strand elements and their average lengths. Note that in OSL, the limit on the least dimension of the wood strands is the same as LSL. The average

===== Page 0162 =====
length limit on the wood strand is what distinguishes OSL from LSL. LVL is made of composite wood veneer sheet elements with wood fibers primarily oriented along the length of the member where the thicknesses of the veneers are 6.5 mm or less.

## STRUCTURAL GLUED-LAMINATED

TIMBER. An engineered, stress-rated product of a timber laminating plant, comprised of assemblies of specially selected and prepared wood laminations in which the grain of all laminations is approximately parallel longitudinally and the laminations are bonded with adhesives.

Structural wood members can be produced by laminating smaller pieces of lumber together in a specific way using glues to create high-performing structural members. Typically, these 50 mm wide members are arranged in a specific order so that their strength characteristics are used most efficiently. For example, the outer laminations are for tension and compression while the inner laminations are for horizontal shear. Although these members are made of smaller pieces of lumber, they act together to create sizes that are included in the requirements for heavy timber framing members. Section 2303.1.3 references ANSI/APA A 190.1, which specifies the method of manufacturing these members, and the means of identifying their performance capabilities. ASTM D3737 covers procedures for establishing their structural properties.

STRUCTURAL OBSERVATION. The visual observation of the structural system by a registered design professional for general conformance to the approved construction documents.

Where required based on wind or seismic hazards, the registered design professional must visit the site to visually determine general conformance to the approved construction documents. Structural observation is an additional tier of inspections and does not substitute for the inspections required by Sections 110 or 1705; or other sections of the code.

STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed.

This definition is intentionally broad so as to include within its scope, and therefore the scope of the code (see Section 101.2), everything that is built as an improvement to real property. See also the definitions for "Building" and "Area, building" for the difference between a building and structure.

SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

This term is used in the definition of "Substantial improvement." The work necessary to repair a substantially damaged building qualifies as substantial improvement. A building is substantially damaged if the cost of restoring damage to predamage condition equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Buildings in flood hazard areas that are determined to be substantially damaged are required to be brought into compliance with the flood-resistant design requirements for new buildings and structures. The market rate for owner labor, volunteer labor and donated or discounted supplies, if any, must be estimated when determining the cost of repairing or restoring damage (see Section 104.2.1). A substantial damage determination must be made regardless of what causes damage. Buildings may sustain substantial damage due to flood, fire, wind, earthquake, deterioration and other causes. For more guidance, see FEMA P-758.

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alteration, addition or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

1 Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.

2 Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.

Section 105.3 directs the applicant to state the valuation of the proposed work as part of the information submitted to obtain a permit. To make a determination (see Section 104.2.1) as to whether a proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage, the building official compares the cost of the proposed work to the market value of the building or structure before the work is started. In order to determine market value, the building official may use the assessed valuation of the building (adjusted as specified by the appropriate appraisal authority) or may require the applicant to

===== Page 0163 =====
provide such information as allowed under Section 105.3. For additional guidance, refer to FEMA P-758, Substantial Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk Reference, and FEMA P-784, Substantial Damage Estimator (SDE) Tool.

SUNROOM. A one-story structure attached to a building with a glazing area in excess of 40 percent of the gross area of the structure's exterior walls and roof.

This terminology is provided in order to address separate requirements for sunrooms with regard to ventilation of adjoining spaces (see Section 1202.5.1.1). Sunrooms can be either an addition or part of the original construction. Provisions in Chapter 12 are applicable regardless of whether the sunroom is an addition to an existing structure or is part of the original design and construction. Sunrooms that are provided with “thermal isolation” are also addressed in the Saudi Energy Conservation Code (SBC 601 and SBC 602).

SUPERVISING STATION. A facility that receives signals and at which personnel are in attendance at all times to respond to these signals.

The supervising station is the location where all fire protection-system-related signals are sent and where trained personnel are present to respond to an emergency. The supervising station may be an approved central station, a remote supervising station, a proprietary supervising station or other constantly attended location approved by the fire code official. Each type of supervising station must comply with the applicable specific provisions described in NFPA 72.

SUPERVISORY SERVICE. The service required to monitor performance of guard tours and the operative condition of fixed suppression systems or other systems for the protection of life and property.

The supervisory service is responsible for maintaining the integrity of the fire protection system by notifying the supervising station of a change in protection system status. Guard tours are recognized as a non-required (voluntary) system. If a guard tour is provided, the signals from that system can be transmitted through the supervisory service to the supervision station. Guard tours are not a required part of a fire alarm system.

SUPERVISORY SIGNAL. A signal indicating the need of action in connection with the supervision of guard tours, the fire suppression systems or equipment or the maintenance features of related systems.

Activation of a supervisory signal-initiating device transmits a signal indicating that a change in the status of the fire protection system has occurred and that action must be taken. These signals are the basis for the actions taken by the attendant at the supervising station. These signals do not indicate an emergency condition but indicate that a portion of the system is not functioning in the manner in which it should and that if the condition is not corrected it could impair the ability of the fire protection system to perform properly. A supervisory signal is also a part of the non-required guard tour system.

## SUPERVISORY SIGNAL-INITIATING

DEVICE. An initiation device, such as a valve supervisory switch, water-level indicator or low-air pressure switch on a dry-pipe sprinkler system, whose change of state signals an off-normal condition and its restoration to normal of a fire protection or life safety system, or a need for action in connection with guard tours, fire suppression systems or equipment or maintenance features of related systems.

The supervisory signal-initiating device detects a change in protection system status. Examples of a supervisory signal-initiating device include a flow switch to detect movement of water through the system and a tamper switch to detect when someone shuts off a water control valve.

SUSCEPTIBLE BAY. A roof or portion thereof with either of the following:

1 A slope less than 20 mm per meter; or

2 On which water is impounded, in whole or in part, and the secondary drainage system is functional, but the primary drainage system is blocked. A roof surface with a slope of 20 mm per meter or greater towards points of free drainage is not a susceptible bay.

This term is needed to identify portions of roofs that must be investigated for the possibility of progressive deflections due to ponding.

SWIMMING POOL. Any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing or wading that contains water over 600 mm deep. This includes in-ground, above ground and on-ground pools; hot tubs; spas and fixed-in-place wading pools.

Section 3109 provides reference to the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, which provides requirements for these facilities. Accessibility to swimming pools is addressed in Section 1111.4.14. The ISPSC provides specifics for residential and public swimming pools based on the location and type/class of pool. While this definition says water over 600 mm deep, wading pools are a Class F pool and defined in ISPSC Section 405 with water 450 mm in depth or less. Hot tubs and cold baths are considered types of spa, which is subdivided into portable or fixed spas.

T RATING. The time period that the penetration

===== Page 0164 =====
firestop system, including the penetrating item, limits the maximum temperature rise to  \( 165^{\circ} \) C above its initial temperature through the penetration on the nonfire side when tested in accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479.

See the definition of “Through-penetration firestop system.” Some through penetrations having a high thermal conductivity (e.g., metal pipes, cables) will not be able to achieve a T rating without some method to prevent the heat from being transmitted from the fire side to the nonfire side. For metallic pipes, insulation must be applied to the through penetrant for some distance on one or, more often, both sides of the fire-resistance-rated assembly. Thus, where a T rating is desired, the seemingly unusual situation can arise of needing to insulate items that would normally not need insulation, such as drain pipes or conduit. Some plastic pipes are also unable to achieve a T rating without some insulation, particularly those used and, therefore, tested as “open” systems, where hot gases from the test furnace are able to flow within the plastic pipe once the pipe burns through. The type and thickness of insulation required, as well as the length over which it must be applied, are all indicated in the through-penetration firestop system listings. Some highly intumescent firestop products can close (choke down) a plastic pipe early enough during a fire test to prevent hot gases from heating up the pipe from inside, thus allowing plastic pipe through-penetration firestop systems to be developed that have a T rating without the need for any insulation.

To avoid the need for a T rating altogether, through penetrations that pass-through floors can be contained within a chase wall (see Section 714.5.1.2 exceptions). It is particularly important for the designer to plan ahead to have through penetrations concealed within a chase wall or located in a shaft in cases where adding insulation to the through penetrant is an undesirable or unacceptable option.

In the case of cable through penetrations, the need for heat dissipation would usually make the application of additional insulating material unacceptable. The few cable through-penetration firestop systems that do have a T rating achieve this by enclosing the cables within some protective enclosure for a distance from the rated assembly, thus allowing any heat transmitted through the cables during fire exposure to be dissipated, resulting in the exposed section of cabling to be cool enough for the duration of the fire test exposure to meet the T rating requirement [see Commentary Figure 202(38)].

Overall, due to the unavoidable difficulty in having a conductive or semiconducting through penetrant obtain a T rating, less than 5 percent of all tested and listed through-penetration firestop systems have a T rating. This is because the T rating indicates that the firestop system is not only capable of stopping the fire, flame and hot gases from passing through the assembly at the penetration as an F rating does, but it also must limit the temperature transfer to the unexposed side of the assembly.

TECHNICAL PRODUCTION AREA. Open elevated areas or spaces intended for entertainment technicians to walk on and occupy for servicing and operating entertainment technology systems and equipment. Galleries, including fly and lighting galleries, gridirons, catwalks, and similar areas are designed for these purposes.

The definition replaces the dated terms and definitions of fly gallery and gridiron. A technical production area encompasses all areas, regardless of their traditional name, used to support entertainment technology from above the performance area. Such areas are sometimes called the backstage. Technical production areas may also be used in venues without stages or platforms, such as sports arenas. Technical production areas are regulated in Section 410.

TENSILE MEMBRANE STRUCTURE. A membrane structure having a shape that is determined by tension in the membrane and the geometry of the support structure. Typically, the structure consists of both flexible elements (e.g., membrane and cables), nonflexible elements (e.g., struts, masts, beams and arches) and the anchorage (e.g., supports and foundations). This includes frame-supported tensile membrane structures.

This definition is associated with the requirements in Sections 3102.1 and 3102.2 for the construction of such structures. These types of structures have specific features and are regulated by ASCE 55. The definition serves as a clarification as to which structures must comply with ASCE 55. See commentary for Section 3102.2.

TENT. A structure, enclosure, umbrella structure or shelter, with or without sidewalls or drops, constructed of fabric or pliable material supported in any manner except by air or the contents it protects (see “Umbrella structure”).

Tents can be temporary or permanent structures. Where permanent, they are considered membrane covered structures and are regulated by Section 3102. Where erected as temporary enclosures, they are regulated by Section 3103.

TERMINATED STOPS. Factory feature of a door frame where the stops of the door frame are terminated not more than 150 mm from the bottom

===== Page 0165 =====
of the door frame. Terminated stops are also known as “hospital stops” or “sanitary stops.”

The purpose of terminated stops on a door frame is to make it easier to clean that area of the floor without extra corners to catch debris or pathogens, and to avoid getting movable items caught on the stop. The most common location for terminated stops is on interior door openings in health care facilities, although they are sometimes found in other types of buildings. The bottom of the stop is closed at a 45-degree or 90-degree angle. See Figure 202(39) as an example of a terminated stop.

THERMAL ISOLATION. A separation of conditioned spaces, between a sumroom and a dwelling unit, consisting of existing or new walls, doors or windows.

This terminology is needed for the same reason provided in the definition of “Sunroom.” A sunroom with thermal isolation according to Section 1202.5 can be a source of natural ventilation.

THERMOPLASTIC MATERIAL. A plastic material that is capable of being repeatedly softened by increase of temperature and hardened by decrease of temperature.

Thermoplastic materials become plastic and deform easily at higher temperatures. Indeed, many of these materials have limited construction value at high temperatures. Examples of thermoplastics are cellulose acetate, nylon, polycarbonates, polyethylene (three different densities), methyl methacrylate (plexiglass), polypropylene, polybutylene, polystyrene, acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS), polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon \( ^{\circledR} \) ), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) and polyethylene terephthalate (polyester). Note there are both thermosetting and thermoplastic polyesters. These materials have high thermal expansion coefficients and, while they may burn slowly in a fire, they decompose rapidly to yield a heavy black smoke and acrid, sometimes very toxic, fumes depending on the specific material and burning conditions.

THERMOSETTING MATERIAL. A plastic material that is capable of being changed into a substantially nonreformable product when cured.

This term is the opposite of a thermoplastic material. Common thermosetting plastic includes epoxy, melamine, urea, polyester and polyurethane.

THROUGH PENETRATION. A breach in both sides of a floor, floor-ceiling or wall assembly to accommodate an item passing through the breaches.
This term is different from a single "membrane penetration." It defines the situation where an opening (a breach in both membranes of an assembly) is created to accommodate an object that passes completely through an assembly from one side to the other [see Commentary Figure 202(38) for an example of a through penetration]. It is important to realize that this term applies only to an item that passes all the way through the assembly; back-to-back membrane penetrations, such as outlet boxes on each side of a wall assembly, should not be considered a through penetration.

THROUGH-PENETRATION FIRESTOP SYSTEM. An assemblage consisting of a fire-resistance-rated floor, floor ceiling, or wall assembly, one or more penetrating items passing through the breaches in both sides of the assembly and the materials or devices, or both, installed to resist the spread of fire through the assembly for a prescribed period of time.

One method of protection for penetrations through fire walls, fire barriers, fire partitions and fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling assemblies is to provide a through-penetration firestop system (see Sections 714.4.1.2 and 714.5.1.2). Through-penetration firestop systems maintain the required protection from the spread of fire, passage of hot gases and transfer of heat. The protection is often provided by an intumescent material. Upon exposure to high temperatures, this material expands as much as eight to 10 times its original volume, forming a high-strength char. This is one of several types of through-penetration firestop systems available. This definition is based on information from three sources: ASTM E814; a compilation of definitions from ASTM International standards and the UL Fire Resistance Directory.

TIE, WALL. Metal connector that connects wythes of masonry walls together.

Ties are used to connect adjacent masonry wythes and are subject to requirements for strength, durability and installation. Ties are either adjustable or nonadjustable.

TIE-DOWN (HOLD-DOWN). A device used to resist uplift of the chords of shear walls.

A shear wall resists lateral forces that are typically applied at the top of and parallel to the wall from the floor or roof diaphragm. This load will rack the wall and attempt to turn it over. Where the strength of the sheathing and framing is adequate to resist the load and appropriately attached, the sheathing will resist the tendency to rack the wall. To prevent the wall from overturning, the tension chord must be adequately anchored to the foundation or structure below. Anchor bolts in the sill plate

===== Page 0166 =====
are not typically designed to resist these overturning loads. Hold-down devices are often necessary at the ends of the shear wall to resist overturning from high lateral loads due to wind loads or seismic ground motion.

TILE, STRUCTURAL CLAY. A hollow masonry unit composed of burned clay, shale, fire clay or mixture thereof, and having parallel cells.

These clay masonry units are produced as end tiles and side tiles and differ from clay brick by having required cells with thinner webs between them.

TIRES, BULK STORAGE OF. Storage of tires where the area available for storage exceeds  \( 565 \, m^{3} \) .

This definition describes a storage space that is larger than what would be found in most typical mercantile and storage occupancies. Because of its size and the volume of combustible material it would house, it poses an extraordinary hazard for fire protection.

The volume is based on the legacy code definition, which was based on 10,000 passenger vehicle tires weighing an average of 10 kg each, rather than the volume of the stored tires. Assuming a 610 mm by 610 mm space for an average passenger vehicle tire and a 152 mm thickness, the result is 565 m³: 10,000 tires × 0.610 m × 0.610 m × 0.152 mm = 565 m³

The 565 m \( ^{3} \)  represents the actual volume of stored materials based on an equivalent height and area for passenger vehicle tires as shown in the preceding calculation and does not include circulation area or other portions of the building. Rather, it focuses on how much of the material is present. Although the definition uses the term “area” rather than “volume,” it is the volume that becomes the threshold consideration. Still, the area where the tires are stored implies the footprint used for storage. It is not the intent to apply this to areas outside of those used for bulk tire storage.

Buildings used for the bulk storage of tires are classified as Group S-1 occupancies in accordance with Section 311.2. All Group S-1 occupancies, regardless of square meters, are required by Section 903.2.9.2 to be equipped with an NFPA 13 automatic sprinkler system where used for the bulk storage of tires. Chapter 34 of SBC 801 also requires that bulk tire storage buildings be further designed to comply with NFPA 13, and Chapter 32 of SBC 801 includes additional requirements for high-piled rubber tire storage as a high-hazard commodity (see commentary, Chapters 32 and 34 of SBC 801).

TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units in which each unit extends from the foundation to roof and with open space on at least two sides.

This specific configuration of construction is called different things in different parts of the country, such as a rowhouse. A townhouse structure that meets the following four criteria is not regulated by this code but is regulated by SBC 1101/1102. Those criteria are:

1 Each unit extends from foundation to roof with no vertical overlap of any parts of adjoining units.

2 Each unit must have open space on at least two sides (either two opposite or two adjoining sides).

3 Each unit must have a separate means of egress.

4 The building must not exceed three stories above grade plane.

If all of these criteria are met, then according to the exception to Section 101.2, the structure is within scope of SBC 1101/1102. (It should also be noted that townhouses within SBC 1101/1102 must be separated by a wall or walls meeting specific criteria.) where a structure does not meet these four criteria, it will need to be regulated under this code and will either be classified as a Group R-2 or Group R-3 structure, depending on how the units are separated. A building containing three or more dwelling units is regulated as a Group R-2 occupancy. To be considered a Group R-3, the structure must have one or two dwelling units, or be subdivided by fire walls between every unit or every two units (see Section 310 and the definitions for "Area, building," "Dwelling" and "Dwelling unit"). Finally, the definition of "Townhouse" is not dependent on the presence of individual lots. A townhouse structure could be built with any number of attached units on the same lot, or it could be developed such that a property line lies at each common wall separating two units (see definition for "Lot").

TOXIC. A chemical falling within any of the following categories:

1 A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of more than 50 milligrams per kilogram, but not more than 500 milligrams per kilogram of body weight when administered orally to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each.

2 A chemical that has a median lethal dose (LD50) of more than 200 milligrams per kilogram, but not more than 1,000 milligrams per kilogram of body weight when administered by continuous contact for 24 hours (or less if death occurs within 24

===== Page 0167 =====
hours) with the bare skin of albino rabbits weighing between 2 and 3 kilograms each.

3 A chemical that has a median lethal concentration (LC50) in air of more than 200 parts per million, but not more than 2,000 parts per million by volume of gas or vapor, or more than 2 milligrams per liter but not more than 20 milligrams per liter of mist, fume or dust, when administered by continuous inhalation for 1 hour (or less if death occurs within 1 hour) to albino rats weighing between 200 and 300 grams each.

The definition is derived from DOL 29 CFR: Part 1910.1200. These materials are considered dangerous to humans when inhaled, absorbed or injected through the skin, or orally ingested. Toxic materials differ from highly toxic materials with regard to the specified median lethal dose or concentration of a given chemical. Toxic materials present a health hazard and are subsequently listed as a Group H-4 material in Section 307.6.

TRANSIENT. Occupancy of a dwelling unit or sleeping unit for not more than 30 days.

This definition is intended to establish a time parameter to differentiate between transient and non-transient as listed under Groups R-1 and R-2. Real estate law often dictates that a lease must be created after 30 days, and 30-day time periods are typically how extended-stay hotels and motels rent to people. Such a time period gives the occupant time to be familiar with the surroundings and, therefore, become more accustomed to any hazards of the built environment than an overnight guest or a guest who stays for just a few days. Since non-transient occupancies do not have the same level of protection in the code as transient occupancies, it is important to determine what makes an occupancy transient so as to provide consistency in enforcement.

TRANSIENT AIRCRAFT. Aircraft based at another location and that is at the transient location for not more than 90 days.

Transient aircraft are those that are merely visiting an airport as compared to those that are based at that location. The definition is used in conjunction with Section 412.3.6 to establish the level of fire suppression needed in various aircraft hangars. Fixed-base operators, especially at larger airports, will have distinct hangars that are used for repair and maintenance of aircraft. The hangars used by transient aircraft are primarily a storage place for aircraft based at another location. This better identifies the intended use of this type of aircraft hangar. Most frequently, the owner who wants to develop an aircraft hangar that fits the Group II category will do no "major maintenance" and will only store airplanes in the hangar (see commentary, Section 412.3.6).

TREATED WOOD. See “Fire-retardant-treated wood” and “Preservative-treated wood.

TRIM. Picture molds, chair rails, baseboards, handrails, door and window frames and similar decorative or protective materials used in fixed applications.

As interior trim, this material is usually combustible and permanently affixed. Trim is primarily located around door and window openings (frames), around walls at floors (baseboard) and on walls (chair rail). Interior trim material should only constitute 10 percent of the wall or ceiling area (see Section 806.7).

TROUBLE SIGNAL. A signal initiated by the fire alarm system or device indicative of a fault in a monitored circuit or component.

This type of signal indicates that there has been an abnormal change in the normal status of the fire detection system or devices and that a response is required to determine the nature of the fault condition. The trouble signal is only associated with electronic portions of a fire protection system. Physical conditions such as a closed valve are monitored electronically and would report as a supervisory signal rather than a trouble signal. A valve supervisory switch, or "tamper switch," for example, would perform such a function.

TUBULAR DAYLIGHTING DEVICE (TDD). A non-operable fenestration unit primarily designed to transmit daylight from a roof surface to an interior ceiling via a tubular conduit. The basic unit consists of an exterior glazed weathering surface, a light-transmitting tube with a reflective interior surface, and an interior-sealing device such as a translucent ceiling panel. The unit can be factory assembled, or field-assembled from a manufactured kit.

This definition helps to differentiate tubular daylighting devices (TDDs) from unit skylights, both of which are subject to similar requirements in Chapter 24. These devices are typically field assembled from a manufactured kit, unlike a unit skylight which is typically shipped as a factory-assembled unit.

TYPE A UNIT. A dwelling unit or sleeping unit designed and constructed for accessibility in accordance with this code and the provisions for Type A units in ICC A117.1.

===== Page 0168 =====
There are three levels of accessibility described in the code pertaining to dwelling units: Accessible units (always spelled with a capital "A"), Type A units and Type B units. A Type A unit has some elements that are constructed for accessibility [e.g., 800 mm clear width doors with maneuvering clearances] and some elements that are constructed as adaptable (e.g., blocking for future installation of grab bars). A Type A dwelling unit is designed and constructed to provide accessibility for wheelchair users throughout the unit, and, as such, is considered more accessible than a Type B dwelling unit. Because some adaptable features are permitted in the standard, the Type A unit is considered less wheelchair-user friendly than an Accessible unit. Type A units are only scoped in large apartment buildings of Group R-2 occupancies. The technical requirements for the interior of Type A units are in Section 1103 of ICC A117.1 (see commentary, Section 1108.2).

TYPE B UNIT. A dwelling unit or sleeping unit designed and constructed for accessibility in accordance with this code and the provisions for Type B units in ICC A117.1.

There are three levels of accessibility described in the code pertaining to dwelling units: Accessible units (always spelled with a capital "A"), Type A units and Type B units. A Type B dwelling or sleeping unit is designed and constructed to provide a minimal level of accessibility, and, as such, is considered less accessible than either an Accessible unit or a Type A unit. The requirements for Type B units are intended to be consistent with the Fair Housing Amendments Act (FHAA). Type B units are scoped in many types of housing. The technical requirements for the interior of Type B units are in Section 1104 of ICC A117.1 (see commentary, Section 1108.2 and the definition for "Intended to be occupied as a residence").

UMBRELLA STRUCTURE. A structure, enclosure or shelter with or without sidewalks or drops, constructed of fabric or pliable material supported by a central pole or poles (see "Tent").

This definition is provided to further explain the concept now included in the definition for "Tent." There are umbrellas that exceed 38 m² in area. Even where individual umbrellas do not exceed 38 m², they are often designed to connect to other such umbrellas. These structures offer extended weather protection and include accessories such as rain gutters, side panels and additional electrical wiring for lights and heater attachment. These accessories allow the structure to mimic a tent with or without sides, be of substantial size and be used as protection over an assembly occupancy. Previous to being addressed within the definition of tent, however, the fabric did not require compliance with NFPA 701. Since these structures are now considered a tent by definition, such umbrellas must meet the requirements of NFPA 701.

UNDERLAYMENT. One or more layers of a material that is applied to a steep-slope roof covering deck under the roof covering and resists liquid water that penetrates the roof covering.

According to Section 1507.2.3, underlayment is required to comply with ASTM D226 or ASTM D4869, Type I, which is commonly referred to as No. 15 asphalt felt. The definition is generic and does not limit designers to one material.

UNDERPINNING. The alteration of an existing foundation to transfer loads to a lower elevation using new piers, piles or other permanent structural support elements installed below the existing foundation.

The purpose of underpinning is to strengthen the foundation of an existing building or structure. Underpinning may involve extending the foundation in depth or area so it either rests on a more supportive soil stratum or distributes its load across a larger area.

• Underpinning may be needed for any of the following reasons:

- The original foundation is not stable or strong enough to support additional stories.

- The structure's use has changed so there will be increased floor loads.

- The properties of the soil supporting the foundation have changed over time due to earthquake, flood, drought or other natural causes.

- The construction of nearby structures necessitates the excavation of soil supporting existing foundations.

UNIT SKYLIGHT. See “Skylight, unit.”

UNSTABLE (REACTIVE) MATERIAL. A material, other than an explosive, which in the pure state or as commercially produced, will vigorously polymerize, decompose, condense or become self-reactive and undergo other violent chemical changes, including explosion, when exposed to heat, friction or shock, or in the absence of an inhibitor, or in the presence of contaminants, or in contact with incompatible materials. Unstable (reactive) materials are subdivided as follows:

Class 1. Materials that in themselves are normally stable but which can become unstable at elevated temperatures and pressure.

===== Page 0169 =====
Class 2. Materials that in themselves are normally unstable and readily undergo violent chemical change but do not detonate. This class includes materials that can undergo chemical change with rapid release of energy at normal temperatures and pressures, and that can undergo violent chemical change at elevated temperatures and pressures.

Class 3. Materials that in themselves are capable of detonation or of explosive decomposition or explosive reaction but which require a strong initiating source or which must be heated under confinement before initiation. This class includes materials that are sensitive to thermal or mechanical shock at elevated temperatures and pressures.

Class 4. Materials that in themselves are readily capable of detonation or explosive decomposition or explosive reaction at normal temperatures and pressures. This class includes materials that are sensitive to mechanical or localized thermal shock at normal temperatures and pressures.

The classification of unstable (reactive) materials is based on provisions in NFPA 704. The different classes of unstable (reactive) materials reflect the degree of susceptibility of the materials to release energy. Unstable (reactive) materials polymerize, decompose or become self-reactive when exposed to heat, air, moisture, pressure or shock. Separation from incompatible materials is essential to minimizing the hazards. Examples of unstable (reactive) materials include nitromethane, perchloric acid, sodium perchlorate, vinyl acetate and acetic acid.

USE (MATERIAL). Placing a material into action, including solids, liquids and gases.

This definition describes the active utilization mode of a material as opposed to the inactive nature of storage or the limited movement or transport involved in handling. This mode tends to be more hazardous in that the material is exposed to human or mechanical contact rather than being confined to a closed container, thus increasing the potential for spills or other releases of liquids, vapors, gases or solids.

VAPOR DIFFUSION PORT. An assembly constructed or installed within a roof assembly at an opening in the roof deck to convey water vapor from an unvented attic to the outside atmosphere.

The port acts as a moisture control measure for unvented attics, allowing moisture in the attic to be removed by vapor diffusion rather than by air change. This allows the attic assembly to remain airtight while providing a path for vapor moisture via vapor diffusion. See Section 1202.3.

VAPOR PERMEABLE. The property of having a moisture vapor permeance rating of 5 perms (2.9 × 10⁻¹⁰ kg/Pa × s × m²) or greater, when tested in accordance with Procedure A or Procedure B of ASTM E96. A vapor permeable material permits the passage of moisture vapor.

* Greater demands on the building envelope due to energy conservation considerations now dictate the need for an outer membrane that reduces wind infiltration. The membranes used in this application may need to allow vapor to pass through, given that a vapor barrier would be needed on the inside of the wall and would be undesirable on the outside of the wall. In such cases, a vapor-permeable membrane would be used. Membranes with a permeance rating lower than 10 perms are considered vapor retarders.

VAPOR RETARDER CLASS. A measure of a material or assembly's ability to limit the amount of moisture that passes through that material or assembly. Vapor retarder class shall be defined using the desiccant method with Procedure A of ASTM E96 as follows:

CLASS I: 0.1 perm or less.

CLASS II: 0.1 < perm ≤ 1.0 perm.

CLASS III: 1.0 < perm ≤ 10 perm.

* Vapor retarders are used to limit moisture intrusion into a building. The definition establishes three classes of vapor retarders based on the amount of moisture that can pass through in a given time period.

Class I: 0.1 perm or less.

Class II: 0.1 < perm ≤ 1.0 perm.

Class III: 1.0 < perm ≤ 10 perm.

VEGETATIVE ROOF. An assembly of interacting components designed to waterproof a building’s top surface that includes, by design, vegetation and related landscape elements.

Vegetative roofs are a specific design element used in SBC 1201 to provide a cool roof or to limit heat island impacts of a building. For SBC 201, their effects on roofing requirements and structural design are addressed in Chapters 15 and 16, respectively.

VEHICLE BARRIER. A component or a system of components, near open sides or walls of garage floors or ramps that act as a restraint for vehicles.

This definition describes the barriers that must be built to the minimum design loads set forth in Section 1607.8.

VEHICULAR GATE. A gate that is intended for use at a vehicular entrance or exit to a facility, building or portion thereof, and that is not intended for use by pedestrian traffic.

This definition provides the scope for the particular type of gates addressed by Section 3110. They are, specifically, those gates associated with vehicles at a building or facility

===== Page 0170 =====
as a opposed to a parking lot or access road. In addition, it clarifies that these gates are not used by people.

VENEER. A facing attached to a wall for the purpose of providing ornamentation, protection or insulation, but not counted as adding strength to the wall.

Veneers are wall facings or claddings of various materials that are used for environmental protection or ornamentation on the exterior of walls. Veneers are nonstructural in that they do not carry any load other than their own weight.

VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.

Ventilation is the process of moving air to or from building spaces. This definition of ventilation requirements is used in the code to establish minimum levels of air movement within a building for the purposes of providing a healthful interior environment. Ventilation would include both natural (openable exterior windows and doors for wind movement) and mechanical (forced air with mechanical equipment) methods.

VINYL SIDING. A shaped material, made principally from rigid polyvinyl chloride (PVC), that is used as an exterior wall covering.

Vinyl siding is discussed in Sections 1403.9 and 1404.14. This material offers a siding product that does not require regular painting. It is offered in a variety of colors and textures. Some vinyl siding is manufactured with some relief on the face of the product to emulate wood grain. It is important where applying the material to use an attachment method that allows the product to move as it expands and contracts. Static connections will cause the material to crack and warp.

VISIBLE ALARM NOTIFICATION
APPLIANCE. A notification appliance that alerts
by the sense of sight.

Visible alarm notification appliances are located anywhere an occupant notification system is required to assist occupants who may be hearing impaired, where the general noise level is high enough that occupants might not hear the audible alarms and in sleeping accommodations of Group I-1 and R-1 occupancies. These alarm notification devices must be located and oriented so that they will display alarm signals throughout the required space. Visible alarms, where provided, are typically installed in the public and common areas of buildings (see commentary, Section 907.5.2.3).

WALKWAY, PEDESTRIAN. A walkway used exclusively as a pedestrian trafficway.
A pedestrian walkway is a normally enclosed passageway external to, and not considered part of, the buildings it connects. Intended only for pedestrian use, it can be at grade, below grade or elevated above grade. Under specific design conditions, the walls of an above-grade pedestrian walkway can be open.

WALL This definition applies only to Chapter 21. A vertical element with a horizontal length-to-thickness ratio greater than three, used to enclose space.

Masonry walls, as addressed in Chapter 21, typically enclose space and therefore are generally required to be designed and installed for weather resistance, durability and adequate strength. The given dimensional requirements differentiate masonry walls from masonry columns.

CAVITY WALL. A wall built of masonry units or of concrete, or a combination of these materials, arranged to provide an airspace within the wall, and in which the inner and outer parts of the wall are tied together with metal ties.

Cavity walls are made up of solid or hollow masonry units separated by a continuous airspace or cavity. This continuous airspace adds insulating value and acts as a barrier to moisture when detailed with flashing and weep holes. In many cavity walls, thermal insulation is placed between the masonry wythes to further enhance thermal efficiency.

## DRY-STACKED, SURFACE-BONDED

WALL. A wall built of concrete masonry units where the units are stacked dry, without mortar on the bed or head joints, and where both sides of the wall are coated with a surface-bonding mortar.

Although this type of masonry wall is dry stacked, a leveling course set in a full bed of mortar is often used. Dry-stacked walls are also required to be placed in a running bond pattern (see the commentary to the definition of "Mortar, surface-bonding").

PARAPET WALL. The part of any wall entirely above the roof line.

These portions of masonry walls project above the roof. A parapet wall is exposed to weather on both sides and is laterally unsupported at the top. Parapets often have copings.

WALL, LOAD-BEARING. Any wall meeting either of the following classifications:

1 Any metal or wood stud wall that supports more than 1450 N/m of vertical load in addition to its own weight.

2 Any masonry, concrete or mass timber wall that supports more than 2900 N/m of vertical load in addition to its own weight.

This definition is necessary since the structural requirements and fire-resistance-rating

===== Page 0171 =====
requirements in the code vary for nonload-bearing walls and loadbearing walls. The term "load-bearing walls" is intended to refer to wall elements that support part of the structural framework of a building.

WALL, NONLOAD-BEARING. Any wall that is not a load-bearing wall.

This definition is necessary since the structural requirements and fire-resistance-rating requirements in the code vary for nonload-bearing walls and loadbearing walls. Nonload-bearing walls do not support any portion of the building or structure except the weight of the wall itself.

WATER-REACTIVE MATERIAL. A material that explodes; violently reacts; produces flammable, toxic or other hazardous gases; or evolves enough heat to cause auto-ignition or ignition of combustibles upon exposure to water or moisture. Water-reactive materials are subdivided as follows:

CLASS 3. Materials that react explosively with water without requiring heat or confinement.

CLASS 2. Materials that react violently with water or have the ability to boil water. Materials that produce flammable, toxic or other hazardous gases or evolve enough heat to cause auto-ignition or ignition of combustibles upon exposure to water or moisture.

CLASS 1. Materials that react with water with some release of energy, but not violently.

These materials liberate significant quantities of heat when reacting with water. Combustible water-reactive materials are capable of self-ignition. Even noncombustible water-reactive materials present a hazard because of the heat liberated during their reaction with water, which is sufficient to ignite surrounding combustible materials. While a definition for Class 1 water-reactive materials is provided for informational purposes, the maximum allowable quantities of these materials in accordance with Table 307.1(1) is not limited. The descriptions of each of the subdivisions is consistent with the approach used for the determination of water hazards in NFPA 704.

WATER-RESISTIVE BARRIER. A material behind an exterior wall covering that is intended to resist liquid water that has penetrated behind the exterior covering from further intruding into the exterior wall assembly.

Protection of the building envelope from moisture intrusion is a primary concern. The ability of the water-resistive barrier to provide weather resistance and maintain the integrity of the building envelope is key to controlling water-based problems such as mold, decay and deterioration of a structure. Water-resistive barriers are discussed in Section 1403.2.

WEATHER-EXPOSED SURFACES. Surfaces of walls, ceilings, floors, roofs, soffits and similar surfaces exposed to the weather except the following:

1 Ceilings and roof soffits enclosed by walls, fascia, bulkheads or beams that extend not less than 300 mm below such ceiling or roof soffits.

2 Walls or portions of walls beneath an unenclosed roof area, where located a horizontal distance from an open exterior opening equal to not less than twice the height of the opening.

3 Ceiling and roof soffits located a minimum horizontal distance of 3 m from the outer edges of the ceiling or roof soffits.

Outside surfaces of a building or structure are generally exposed to elements of the weather. Therefore, it is necessary to take special precautions to protect them from damage. The most common way to protect exterior surfaces from damage caused by rain, wind or water from other sources is by the use of building materials that are designed, manufactured and installed to resist or withstand the extremes produced by weather. There are many building materials other than those identified in Chapter 25 that provide excellent protection from weather damage, and are permitted by the Saudi-Codes for use on weather-exposed surfaces. Requirements for other approved materials, such as, but not limited to, brick, concrete, precast concrete panels, concrete unit masonry, wood, vinyl, aluminum, glass and steel, are specified in other chapters of the code.

There are isolated surfaces located on the exterior of a building or structure that are not directly exposed to or in contact with the damaging effects of the weather. These areas are identified in Items 1, 2 and 3 of the definition. Although these surfaces are located on the exterior of the building or structure, they are provided with a permissible amount of protection and are not directly exposed to the weather with regard to moisture. This must be taken into consideration when wall and ceiling covering materials are being selected. Waterproof materials are not required at these locations, but materials approved by the code and the product manufacturer for exterior applications must be used.

WET-CHEMICAL EXTINGUISHING SYSTEM. A solution of water and potassium-carbonate-based chemical, potassium-acetate-based chemical or a combination thereof, forming an

===== Page 0172 =====
extinguishing agent.

This extinguishing agent is a suitable alternative to the use of a dry chemical, especially when protecting commercial kitchen range hoods. There is less cleanup time after system discharge. Wet chemical solutions are considered to be relatively harmless and normally have no lasting effect on the skin or respiratory system. These solutions may produce temporary irritation, which is usually mild and disappears when contact is eliminated. These systems must be pre-engineered and labeled. NFPA 17A applies to the design, installation, operation, testing and maintenance of wet-chemical extinguishing systems.

WHEELCHAIR SPACE. A space for a single wheelchair and its occupant.

A wheelchair space is a designated space for a person to be stationary in his or her wheelchair as part of a fixed assembly seating configuration. The wheelchair space must be sized in accordance with ICC A117.1 (see Section 1109.2.4 for wheelchair space dispersion requirements for multilevel assembly seating). ICC A117.1 provides additional dispersion criteria within a level (i.e., side-to-side, front-to-back and by type), depending on the number of seats provided in the assembly seating space.

WIND SPEED, V. Basic design wind speeds.

This term is needed to identify the mapped wind speed in Section 1609, which is one of the primary criteria for determination of wind loading.

WIND SPEED, V_{sd}. Allowable Stress design wind speeds.

This term is used to identify wind speeds that are converted from the basic (mapped) wind speeds in accordance with Section 1609.3.1. Nominal wind speed is used as a wind criteria, rather than the basic wind speed, for requirements in Chapters 14, 15 and 23, for example.

WIND-BORNE DEBRIS REGION. Areas within hurricane- prone regions located:

1 Within 1.6 km of the mean high-water line where an Exposure D condition exists upwind at the waterline and the basic design wind speed, V, is 58 m/s or greater; or

2 In areas where the basic design wind speed is 63 m/s or greater.

For Risk Category II buildings and structures and Risk Category III buildings and structures, except health care facilities, the wind-borne debris region shall be based on Figure 1609.3(1). For Risk Category IV buildings and structures and Risk Category III health care facilities, the wind-borne debris region shall be based on Figure 1609.3(2).

This definition identifies those areas that require consideration of the impact of windborne debris on the building envelope (see the commentaries to Sections 1609.1 and 1609.2 for information on the effects of openings in the building envelope). Note that Section 1609.3 makes Figure 1609.3(2) applicable to both Risk Category III and IV structures for obtaining the basic design wind speed. However, this definition of windborne debris regions provides somewhat of an exception by allowing Figure 1609.3(1) to be used for establishing the windborne debris regions that are applicable to Risk Category III structures, other than health care facilities. At the same time, it should be noted that the windborne debris region established by Figure 1609.3(2) for Risk Category IV, as well as health care facilities that are Risk Category III.

WINDER. A tread with nonparallel edges.

Winders are used as components of stairways that change direction, just as "fliers" (rectangular treads) are components in straight stairways. A winder performs the same function as a tread, but its shape allows the additional function of a gradual turning of the stairway direction. The tread depth of a winder at the walkline and the minimum tread depth at the narrow end control the turn made by each winder. Winders are not landings. Winder treads are limited to curved or spiral stairways with all groups but are all stairways within dwelling units (see Section 1011.5.3).

WIND FORCE-RESISTING SYSTEM, MAIN. See “Main wind force-resisting system.”

WIRE BACKING. Horizontal strands of tautened wire attached to surfaces of vertical supports which, when covered with the building paper, provide a backing for cement plaster.

Where metal lathe attached to exterior wall studs is used as backing for a plaster base coat, additional reinforcing is necessary to stiffen the wall framing system and minimize unwanted movement to the wall itself. Plaster is a fairly rigid material and excessive movement will cause it to crack. Eighteen-gage metal wire attached horizontally to the face of the wall studs and covered with building paper will provide the additional stiffness required to minimize cracking in the finish surface (see Section 2510.5 for additional commentary on the requirements for wire backing).

WIRELESS PROTECTION SYSTEM. A system or a part of a system that can transmit and receive signals without the aid of wire.

These systems use radio frequency transmitting devices that comply with the

===== Page 0173 =====
special requirements for supervision of low-power wireless systems in NFPA 72. Wireless devices have the advantage of flexibility in positioning. Consequently, portable wireless notification devices are frequently used in existing facilities where visual devices are not present throughout.

WOOD SHEAR PANEL. A wood floor, roof or wall component sheathed to act as a shear wall or diaphragm.

Wood shear panels are horizontal (diaphragm) or vertical (wood shear wall) panels, which transmit forces in the plane of the sheathing caused by lateral loads transmitted from one component of the structure to another. Wood shear panels usually consist of wood framing (studs or joists), either singly or doubly sheathed. The code has design provisions for wood shear panels that are sheathed with 1200 mm by 2400 mm wood structural panels.

WOOD STRUCTURAL PANEL. A panel manufactured from veneers, wood strands or wafers or a combination of veneer and wood strands or wafers bonded together with waterproof synthetic resins or other suitable bonding systems. Examples of wood structural panels are:

The code defines wood structural panels in terms of the materials commonly used in their manufacture. Wood structural panels intended for structural use must comply with DOC PS 1, DOC PS 2 or ANSI/APA PRP 210 in accordance with Section 2303.1.5. These documents specify the required structural performance characteristics of wood structural panels and detail the requirements for the third-party label each panel is required to bear (see Section 2303.1.5 for a more detailed discussion).

COMPOSITE PANELS. A wood structural panel that is comprised of wood veneer and reconstituted wood-based material and bonded together with waterproof adhesive;

Composite panels are structural panels that are made up of a combination of wood veneers and wood-based materials. The wood veneer usually forms the two outer layers and may also be used in the core of the panel. These layers of veneer and wood flakes or strands, called "furnish," may be cross laminated.

ORIENTED STRAND BOARD (OSB). A mat-formed wood structural panel comprised of thin rectangular wood strands arranged in cross-aligned layers with surface layers normally arranged in the long panel direction and bonded with waterproof adhesive; or

Oriented strand board (OSB) is one of three types of wood structural panel. OSB panels are fabricated out of multiple layers made up of wood flakes or strands called "furnish." Like plywood, these layers of furnish are oriented at 90 degrees to each other. This gives OSB panels properties very similar to those of plywood.

PLYWOOD. A wood structural panel comprised of plies of wood veneer arranged in cross-aligned layers. The plies are bonded with waterproof adhesive that cures on application of heat and pressure.

Plywood is one of three types of wood structural panel. It is manufactured by gluing together three or more cross-laminated layers of wood veneer. The code does not differentiate between OSB and plywood, since manufacturing is done according to either the DOC PS 1 standard for construction and industrial plywood or for OSB, DOC PS 2 performance standard for wood-based structural panels.

WOOD/PLASTIC COMPOSITE. A composite material made primarily from wood or cellulose-based materials and plastic.

Wood/Plastic composite is manufactured of wood and cellulosic materials to provide strength and stiffness. These components are typically used for exterior decking and railing systems. Chapter 26, which regulates plastic materials, contains requirements for plastic lumber used as exterior decking components, such as deck boards, stair treads, handrails and guardrails.

WORKSTATION. A defined space or an independent principal piece of equipment using HPM within a fabrication area where a specific function, laboratory procedure or research activity occurs. Approved or listed hazardous materials storage cabinets, flammable liquid storage cabinets or gas cabinets serving a workstation are included as part of the workstation. A workstation is allowed to contain ventilation equipment, fire protection devices, detection devices, electrical devices and other processing and scientific equipment.

Workstations further subdivide a fabrication area and provide relatively self-contained, specialized areas where HPM processes are conducted. Workstation controls limit the quantity of materials and impose limitations on the design of these processes to include, but not be limited to, protection by local exhaust; sprinklers; automatic and emergency shutoffs; construction materials and HPM compatibility. Excess materials are prohibited and must be contained in storage rooms designed to accommodate such hazards.

WYTHE. Each continuous, vertical section of a wall, one masonry unit in thickness.

===== Page 0174 =====
Sometimes referred to as a “leaf” or “tier,” each wytte is one thickness of a masonry unit.

YARD. An open space, other than a court, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except where specifically provided by this code, on the lot on which a building is situated.

This definition is used, in a manner similar to the definition of "Court," to establish the applicability of code requirements where yards are utilized for natural light or natural ventilation purposes (see Section 1205.1). Whereas a court is bounded on three or more sides with the building or structure, a yard is bounded on two or fewer sides by the building or structure (see also the definition of "Egress court").

ZONE. A defined area within the protected premises. A zone can define an area from which a signal can be received, an area to which a signal can be sent or an area in which a form of control can be executed.

Zoning a system is important to emergency personnel in locating a fire. Where an alarm is designated to a specific zone, it allows the fire service to immediately respond to the area where the fire is in progress instead of searching the entire building for the origin of an alarm.

ZONE, NOTIFICATION. An area within a building or facility covered by notification appliances which are activated simultaneously.

This definition is provided to clarify the code by making a clear distinction between fire alarm system initiation device zones required by Section 907.6.4 and the zones that may be designed into occupant notification device systems in a building. The term is used primarily in the exceptions for sprinkler systems found in the manual fire alarm system requirements in Section 907.2 and its subsections. Note that the code does not require audible and visible occupant notification device systems to be zoned. Where such zones are provided, it is a matter of the system design engineer's judgment. The voice paging component in high-rise building emergency voice/alarm communication systems is, however, required to be zoned in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2.

===== Page 0175 =====
## Bibliography

The following resource materials were used in the preparation of the commentary for this chapter of the code:

1 24 CFR, Fair Housing Accessibility Guidelines (FHAG). Washington, DC: US Department of Housing and Urban Development, 1991.

2 ANSI/APA A 190.1-12, Structural Glued-Laminated Timber. Tacoma, WA: APA-Engineered Wood Association, 2012.

3 APA Research Report 154, Wood Structural Panel Shear Wall. Tacoma, WA: APAC Engineered Wood Association.

4 ASCE 7-10, Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures with Supplement No.1 (also ASCE 7-88, ASCE 7-93, ASCE 7-95). Reston, VA: American Society of Civil Engineers, 2010.

5 ASTM C11-13 Standard Terminology Related to Gypsum and Related Building Materials and Systems. West Conshohocken, PA:

6 ASTM International, 2013. ASTM D56-05 (2010), Test Method for Flash Point by Tag Closed Tester. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2005 (2010).

7 ASTM D93-12. Test Methods for Flash Point by Pensky- Martens Closed-Cup Tester. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2012.

8 ASTM D226/D226M-09. Specification for Asphalt-Saturated Organic Felt Used in Roofing and Waterproofing. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2009.

9 ASTM D3278-96 (2011), Test Methods for Flash Point of Liquids by Small-Scale Closed-Cup Apparatus. West Conshohocken, PA:

10 ASTM International, 2011. ASTM D3737-12. Practice for Establishing Allowable Properties for Structural Glued-Laminated Timber (Glulam). West Conshohocken, PA:

11 ASTM International, 2012. ASTM E119-12A, Standard Test Method for Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials. West Conshohocken, PA:

12 ASTM International, 2012A. ASTM E136-12, Test Method for Behavior of Materials in a Vertical Tube Furnace at  \( 750^{\circ} \) C. West Conshohocken, PA:

13 ASTM International, 2012. ASTM E1966-07A (2011), Test Method for Fire-resistant Joint Systems. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2007A (2011).

14 ASTM E2072-10, Standard Specification for Photoluminescent (Phosphorescent) Safety Markings. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2010.

15 AWCI 12-B-04, Technical Manual 12-B Standard Practice for the Testing and Inspection of Field-Applied Thin-Film Intumescent Fire-Resistive Materials; an Annoted Guide, Second Edition. Falls Church, VA: The Association of the Wall and Ceiling Industries International, 2004.

16 AWC SDPWS-15, Special Design Provisions for Wind and Seismic. Leesburg, VA: American Wood Council, 2015.

17 CPA (ANSI) A208.1-09, Particleboard. Leesburg, VA, Composite Panel Association, 2009.

18 DOC PS 1-09, Structural Plywood, Washington, DC, MD: US Department of Commerce, 2010.

19 DOC PS 2-10, Performance Standard for Wood-Based Structural-Use Panels. Gaithersburg, MD: US Department of Commerce, 2010.

20 DOL 29 CFR, Part 1910.1000-09, Air Contaminants. Washington, DC: US Department of Labor, 2009. DOL 29 CFR, Part 1910.1200-07, Principal Emergency Response and Preparedness, Requirements and Guidance—Hazard Communication. Washington, DC: US Department of Labor, 2007.

21 FEMA 450-2-04, NEHRP Recommended Provisions for Seismic Regulations for New Buildings and Other Structures, Part 2: Commentary. Washington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2004.

22 FEMA FIA-TB #2, Flood Damage-resistant Materials Requirements for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas. Washington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2008.

23 FEMA P-758-09, Substantial Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk Reference. Washington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2009.

===== Page 0176 =====
24 FEMA P-784-09, Substantial Damage Estimator. Washington, DC: Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2009.

25 ICC A117.1-09, Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities. Washington, DC: International Code Council, 2011.

26 ISO 8115-86, Cotton Bales Dimensions and Density. Switzerland International Organization for Standardization, 1986.

27 NFPA 11-10, Standard for Low-Expansion Foam. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2010.

28 NFPA 11A-99, Standard For Medium- And High-Expansion Foam Systems. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 1999.

29 NFPA 12A-09, Standard for Halon 1301 Fire-Extinguishing Systems. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2009.

30 NFPA 13-13, Installation of Sprinkler Systems. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013
NFPA 13D-13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013.

31 NFPA 13R-13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Low Rise Residential Occupancies. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013.

32 NFPA 14-13, Standard for the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013.

33 NFPA 17A-13, Standard for Wet-Chemical Extinguishing Systems. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013. NFPA 72-13, National Fire Alarm Code and Signaling Code. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013.

34 NFPA 80-13, Standard for Fire Doors and Other Opening Protectives. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2013. NFPA 252-12, Standard Methods of Fire Tests of Door Assemblies. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2012.

35 NFPA 257-12, Standard On Fire Test For Window And Glass Block Assemblies. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2012.

36 NFPA 701-10, Standard Method of Fire Tests for Flame- Propagation of Textiles and Films. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2010.

37 NFPA 704-12, Standard System for the Identification of the Hazards of Materials for Emergency Response. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2012.

38 NFPA 1124-06, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2006.

39 TMS 402/ACI 530/ASCE 5-13, Building Code Requirements for Masonry Structures. Farmington Hills, MI: American Concrete Institute; Reston, VA: American Society of Civil Engineers; Longmont, CO: The Masonry Society, 2013.

40 TMS 602/ACI 530.1/ASCE 6-13, Specifications for Masonry Structures. Farmington Hills, MI: American Concrete Institute; Reston, VA: American Society of Civil Engineers; Longmont, CO: The Masonry Society, 2013.

41 UL 9-09, Fire Tests of Window Assemblies. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories Inc., 2009.

42 UL 10C-09, Positive Pressure Fire Tests of Door Assemblies. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories Inc., 2009.

43 UL 217-06, Single- and Multiple-Station Smoke Alarms - with Revisions through April 2002. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories Inc., 2006.

44 UL 924-06, Standard for Safety of Emergency Lighting and Power Equipment with Revisions through February 2011. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories Inc., 2005.

45 UL 1994-04, Standard for Luminous Egress Path Marking Systems with Revisions through November 2010. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories Inc., 2005.

46 UL 2079-04, Tests for Fire Resistance for Building Joint Systems with Revisions through December 2012. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories Inc., 2004.

===== Page 0177 =====
## FIGURES OF CHAPTER 2

FIGURE 202(2)
COVERED MALL BUILDING

===== Page 0178 =====
FIGURE 202(3)
EXAMPLE OF ANNULAR SPACE

FIGURE 202(4)

GROSS CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA FOR SINGLE-WYTHE WALL UNDER LOAD

HORIZONTAL PROJECTION OF FLOOR ABOVE DEFINES ADDITIONAL BUILDING AREA THAT IS INCLUDED AS PART OF THE BUILDING AREA

FIGURE 202(5)
BUILDING AREA—PROJECTED

===== Page 0179 =====
FIGURE 202(6)
BALANCED DOOR

(A) STORY A IS NOT A BASEMENT BECAUSE STORY B IS MORE THAN 1.8 METER ABOVE GRADE PLANE

(B) STORY B IS NOT A BASEMENT BECAUSE THE FLOOR LEVEL OF STORY C IS MORE THAN 3.6 METER ABOVE FINISHED GROUND LEVEL AT ONE POINT

FIGURE 202(7)
STORY ABOVE GRADE AND BASEMENTS

===== Page 0180 =====
FIGURE 202(8)
MASONRY CONSTRUCTION TERMS

GROUP R-2—BOARDING HOUSE (OCCUPANTS PRIMARILY NON-TRANSIENT)

===== Page 0181 =====
FIGURE 202(10)
SPECIFIED AND NOMINAL DIMENSIONS FOR NOMINAL 200 × 200 × 400 CONCRETE MASONY UNITS

FIGURE 202(11)
GROUP R-2—DORMITORY
(OCCUPANTS PRIMARILY NON-TRANSIENT)

===== Page 0182 =====
FIGURE 202(12)
EXAMPLE OF DRAFTSTOPPING

FIGURE 202(13)
EXAMPLE OF DRAFTSTOPPING

===== Page 0183 =====
FIGURE 202(15)
EXIT ACCESS

===== Page 0184 =====
FIGURE 202(17)
EXIT DISCHARGE, LEVEL OF

===== Page 0185 =====
BUILDING AREA = FIRE AREA 1 + FIRE AREA 2

FIGURE 202(18)
EXAMPLE OF FIRE BARRIER

WALL ASSEMBLY

FIGURE 202(19)
EXAMPLES OF FIRE-RESISTANT JOINT SYSTEMS

===== Page 0186 =====
FIGURE 202(20)

FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE MEASURED TO AN INTERIOR LOT LINE

FIGURE 202(21)

FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE MEASURED TO THE CENTERLINE OF ADJOINING STREET

===== Page 0187 =====
 \( ^{*} \) FSD: FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE

FIGURE 202(22)
FIRE SEPARATION DISTANCE MEASURED TO AN IMAGINARY LINE BETWEEN TWO BUILDINGS ON THE SAME LOT

FIGURE 202(23)

DETERMINATION OF GRADE PLANE ELEVATION WHERE GRADE SLOPES UNIFORMLY ALONG THE ENTIRE LENGTH OF THE EXTERIOR WALLS

===== Page 0188 =====
FIGURE 202(24)

DETERMINATION OF GRADE PLANE ELEVATIONS WHERE GRADE AND EXTERIOR WALLS ARE IRREGULAR

FIGURE 202(25)

DETERMINATION OF GRADE PLANE WHERE GRADE SLOPES AWAY FROM THE EXTERIOR WALL

===== Page 0189 =====
FIGURE 202(26)

DETERMINATION OF GRADE PLANE ELEVATION WHERE GRADE DOES NOT SLOPE UNIFORMLY ALONG THE LENGTH OF THE EXTERIOR WALLS

===== Page 0190 =====


===== Page 0191 =====
FIGURE 202(29)
EXAMPLES OF HORIZONTAL ASSEMBLIES

FIGURE 202(30)
HORIZONTAL EXIT

FIGURE 202(31)
INDIVIDUAL TRUSS MEMBERS - CHORD AND WEB

===== Page 0192 =====
FIGURE 202(32)
LOW-ENERGY POWER-OPERATED DOOR—DUAL ACTION, DOUBLE LEAF SWINGING TYPE

FIGURE 202(33)

LOW-ENERGY POWER-OPERATED DOOR—SINGLE LEAF WITH REMOTE PLATE

===== Page 0193 =====
FIGURE 202(34)

LOW-ENERGY POWER-OPERATED DOOR— DOUBLE LEAF SLIDING TYPE

FIGURE 202(35)

EXAMPLES OF SINGLE MEMBRANE PENETRATION

===== Page 0194 =====
TYPICAL RUNNING BOND BRICK UNITS

TYPICAL RUNNING BOND CONCRETE MASONRY UNITS

MASONRY THAT IS NOT OVERLAPPED A MINIMUM OF ONE-FOURTH OF THE UNIT LENGTH IS CONSIDERED TO BE LAID IN STACK BOND.

FIGURE 202(36)
RUNNING BOND MASONRY

===== Page 0195 =====
EXAMPLES OF THROUGH-PENETRATION FIRESTOP SYSTEMS

===== Page 0196 =====
FIGURE 202(39)
EXAMPLE OF DOOR FRAME WITH TERMINATED STOP

===== Page 0197 =====
This page left intentionally blank

