===== Page 0805 =====
# CHAPTER 8—INTERIOR FINISHES

## General Comments

Past fire experience has shown that interior finish and decorative materials are key elements in the development and spread of fire. In some cases, interior decorations were the first materials ignited. In many other cases, interior finish materials became involved in the early stages of fire and contributed to their early growth and spread.

The provisions of Chapter 8 require materials used as interior finishes and decorations to have a flame spread index or meet certain flame propagation criteria based on the relative fire hazard associated with the occupancy.

The performance of the material is evaluated based on test standards. The design professional or permit applicant is responsible for determining and providing documentation on the flame spread potential and ability to propagate flames of a material in order to support the permit application. The building official then evaluates the information supplied to ascertain that compliance with the applicable code provisions has been achieved. It is also critical that a field inspection verifies that the material is installed in accordance with the approved documents and the code.

## Purpose

This chapter contains the performance requirements for controlling fire growth within buildings by restricting interior finish materials and decorative materials.

## SECTION 801 SCOPE

801.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the use of materials used as interior finishes, trim and decorative materials.

This Chapter contains requirements for materials used as interior finish, trim or decorative materials. These materials must conform to the flame spread index limitations, heat release and flashover limitations or flame propagation limitations established by this chapter. This Chapter is similar to Chapter 8 of SBC 801 in intent but is focused only on new construction and only on interior finish, trim and a limited amount of decorative materials. SBC 801 addresses both new and existing buildings and also some key building contents.

## SECTION 802 GENERAL

802.1 Interior wall and ceiling finish. The provisions of Section 803 shall limit the allowable fire performance and smoke development of interior wall and ceiling finish materials based on occupancy classification.

The provisions of this chapter require materials used as interior finishes to have limited flame spread and smoke-developed indexes (or a limited heat and smoke release), based on the relative fire hazard and occupant vulnerability associated with the occupancy classification. Section 803 provides the necessary performance of wall and ceiling finishes required in test standards based on the occupancy classification.

802.2 Interior floor finish. The provisions of Section 804 shall limit the allowable fire performance of interior floor finish materials based on occupancy classification.

Just as for wall and ceiling finish materials, Chapter 8 limits flame propagation for materials used as floor finish. Section 804 provides the test requirements and criteria for floor finish materials.

802.3 Decorative materials and trim. Decorative materials and trim shall be restricted by combustibility, fire performance or flame propagation performance criteria in accordance with Section 806.

This section is specific to decorative materials and trim, and their specific hazards versus the interior finish within a space. Section 806 addresses the tests for these materials, such as NFPA 701, which provides an indication of the potential for flame propagation of materials such as draperies. Additionally, materials, such as foam plastic used as interior trim, are limited in their combustibility through size, density and coverage limits (see commentary, Section 806).

802.4 Applicability. For buildings in flood hazard areas, interior finishes, trim and decorative materials below the elevation required by Section 1612 shall be flood-damage-resistant materials.

Building materials located below the elevation required by Section 1612 (which refers to ASCE 24 for specific elevation requirements), including interior finishes, trim and decorative materials, must be resistant to flood damage. Many elevated buildings located in flood hazard areas have enclosed lower areas below the elevated floor. "Flood-damage-resistant materials" are defined as "any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without

===== Page 0806 =====
sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair." In ASCE 24, the term "prolonged contact" means at least 72 hours, and the term "cosmetic repair" means cleaning the affected surfaces with commercially available cleaners and repairing as necessary. For further guidance, refer to FEMA TB #2, Flood Damage-Resistant Material Requirements for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas.

802.5 Application. Combustible materials shall be permitted to be used as finish for walls, ceilings, floors and other interior surfaces of buildings.

This section simply points out that this chapter allows combustible materials as interior finish. This would include the finish of walls that are required to be “noncombustible” due to the building’s type of construction or other code requirements. This is supported by the provisions of Section 603.1, which allows limited combustible materials in Types I and II construction. Item 5 of Section 603.1 lists interior floor finish and interior finish, trim and millwork, such as doors, door frames, window sashes and frames, as allowable combustible materials. The majority of materials that are used as finish materials are combustible in nature. However, all materials in regulated environments are required to exhibit maximum flame spread and smoke-developed indexes or an equivalent performance on heat and smoke release in an appropriate room-corner fire test. Section 803 clarifies the limits on such materials by limiting the flame spread index and smoke-developed index of such materials in certain portions of the building based on the occupancy.

802.6 Windows. Show windows in the exterior walls of the first story above grade plane shall be permitted to be of wood or of unprotected metal framing.

First-story windows used as display spaces are exempt from finish requirements. These areas are subject to frequent redecoration; however, the enforcement of finish requirements would be impractical. The exemption is limited to the first story above grade plane, which is considered to provide ready access for the fire department from the exterior for effective manual fire suppression efforts.

802.7 Foam plastics. Foam plastics shall not be used as interior finish except as provided in Section 803.4. Foam plastics shall not be used as interior trim except as provided in Section 806.5 or 2604.2. This section shall apply both to exposed foam plastics and to foam plastics used in conjunction with a textile or vinyl facing or cover.

This section establishes that foam plastic materials are not permitted to be used as interior finish materials unless the foam plastic complies with Section 2603.4, 2603.10 or 2604. Sections 2603.4 and 2603.4.1 generally require that foam plastic materials be covered by an approved thermal barrier, such as 12.5 mm gypsum wallboard. Where covered in this manner, the foam plastic is no longer the interior finish material. Section 2603.10 provides a means by which foam plastics can be installed without a thermal barrier. A thermal barrier is not required where foam plastic insulation has met the following two criteria:

It has been tested in accordance with FM 4880, UL 1040 or UL 1715 or with NFPA 286 (with the pass/fail criteria of Section 803.1.1.1).

2 The foam plastic meets the flame spread requirements of Section 803 (see commentary, Section 2603.10).

The reference to Section 2604 is for the use of foam plastic as trim.

Sections 806.5 and 2604.2 allow the use of a limited amount of foam plastic as interior trim where certain criteria are met. SBC 801 contains the same allowance for interior trim (see commentary, Section 806.5).

It should be noted that SBC 801 further regulates some building contents with regard to foam plastic. More specifically, Section 807.4.2.1 of SBC 801 places maximum heat release rate criteria on foam plastic used for decorative purposes, stage scenery or exhibit booths when tested in accordance with UL 1975. This code typically does not regulate building contents.

## SECTION 803 WALL AND CEILING FINISHES

803.1 General. Interior wall and ceiling finish materials shall be classified for fire performance and smoke development in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or 803.1.2, except as shown in Sections 803.2 through 803.15. Materials tested in accordance with Section 803.1.1 shall not be required to be tested in accordance with Section 803.1.2.

This section contains options for qualifying interior wall and finish materials; testing in accordance with NFPA 286; or testing in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Sections 803.1.1 and 803.1.1.1 contain requirements related to NFPA 286, whereas Section 803.1.2 contains requirements related to ASTM E84 and UL 723. For further information on test method NFPA 286, see the commentary to Section 803.1.1. For further information on test methods ASTM E84 and UL 723, see the commentary to Section 803.1.2.

===== Page 0807 =====
803.1.1 Interior wall and ceiling finish materials tested in accordance with NFPA 286. Interior wall and ceiling finish materials shall be classified in accordance with NFPA 286 and comply with section 803.1.1.1. Materials complying with Section 803.1.1.1 shall be considered to also comply with the requirements of a class A.

NFPA 286 is known as a “room-corner” fire test and is similar to that referenced for textile wall coverings in Section 803.5.1.1 (NFPA 265) [see Commentary Figure 803.1.1(1) and Figure 803.1.1(2)]. In this test, materials are mounted covering three walls of the compartment (excluding the wall containing the door) and the ceiling. In the case where testing is only for ceiling finish properties, the sample only needs to be mounted on the ceiling. Then a fire source consisting of a gas burner is placed in one corner, flush against both walls (furthest from the doorway) of the compartment with the following exposure conditions:

• 40 kilowatts (kW) for 5 minutes, then

• 160 kW for 10 minutes.

The test then measures heat release and smoke release through the collection of the fire effluents and measurement of oxygen concentrations in the exhaust duct. Heat release is calculated by the oxygen consumption principle, which has shown that heat release is a function of the decrease in oxygen concentration in the fire effluents. Thus, exhaust duct measurements include temperatures, pressures and smoke values for use in the calculations. Temperatures and heat fluxes are also measured in the room. This generally provides a more realistic understanding of the fire hazard associated with the materials.

The NFPA 286 test method does not contain pass/fail criteria. However, the code provides such criteria in Section 803.1.1.1.

803.1.1.1 Acceptance criteria for NFPA 286. The interior finish shall comply with the following:

1 During the 40-kW exposure, flames shall not spread to the ceiling.

2 The flame shall not spread to the outer extremity of the sample on any wall or ceiling.

3 Flashover, as defined in NFPA 286, shall not occur.

4 The peak heat release rate throughout the test shall not exceed 800 kW.

5 The total smoke released throughout the test shall not exceed 1,000 m².
Where the NFPA 286 option is used to qualify interior wall and ceiling finishes, they must meet all the requirements in this section.

The NFPA 286 test method does not contain pass/fail criteria. However, this code section contains such criteria.

803.1.2 Interior wall and ceiling finish materials tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Interior wall and ceiling finish materials shall be classified in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Such interior finish materials shall be grouped in the following classes in accordance with their flame spread and smoke-developed indices.

Class A = Flame spread index 0-25; smoke-developed index 0-450.

Class B = Flame spread index 26-75; smoke-developed index 0-450.

Class C = Flame spread index 76-200; smoke-developed index 0-450.

Exception: Materials tested in accordance with Section 803.1.1 and as indicated in Sections 803.1.3 through 803.13.

Wall and ceiling interior finish and trim materials are required to have limits on flame spread and smoke-developed indexes as prescribed in Section 803.13, based on occupancy. ASTME E84 and UL 723 are very similar standards intended to determine the relative burning behavior of materials on exposed surfaces, such as ceilings and walls, by visually observing the flame spread along the test specimen [see Commentary FIGURE 803.1.2(1) and Figure 803.1.2(2)]. Flame spread and smoke-developed indexes are then reported. The test method is not appropriate for materials that are not capable of supporting themselves or of being supported in the test tunnel. There may also be concerns with materials that drip, melt or delaminate and that are very thin. A distinction is made, therefore, for textile wall or ceiling coverings, expanded vinyl wall or ceiling coverings and foam plastic insulation materials (see Sections 803.5, 803.6, 803.7 and 803.8).

These standards establish flame spread index based on the area under a curve when the actual flame spread distance is plotted as a function of time. The code has divided the acceptable range of flame spread indexes (0-200) into three classes: Class A (0-25), Class B (26-75) and Class C (76-200). For all three classes, the code has established a common acceptable range of smoke-developed index of 0-450. An indication of relative fire performance is as follows: an inorganic reinforced-cement board has a flame spread and smoke-developed index of zero, while

===== Page 0808 =====
select grade red oak wood flooring has a flame spread and smoke-developed index of 100.

803.1.3 Interior wall and ceiling finish materials with different requirements. The materials indicated in Section 803.2 through 803.13 shall be tested as indicated in the corresponding section.

This section states that the purpose of Sections 803.2 through 803.15 is to provide specific testing requirements for the interior wall and ceiling finish materials that are listed in each individual section. There are also testing exemptions for thin materials and exposed portions of heavy timber construction. The materials that are included are: foam plastic materials, textile wall and ceiling coverings, expanded vinyl wall and ceiling coverings, high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and polypropylene (PP), site-fabricated stretch systems, laminated products factory produced with an attached wood substrate, and facings or wood veneers intended to be applied on site over a wood substrate.

803.2 Thickness exemption. Materials having a thickness less than 0.9 mm applied directly to the surface of walls or ceilings shall not be required to be tested.

Thin materials used as interior finish, such as wallpaper, are exempt from the testing requirements of this section. These materials represent a very low fuel load and minimal risk of significant flame spread.

803.3 Heavy timber exemption. Exposed portions of building elements complying with the requirements for buildings of heavy timber construction in Section 602.4 or Section 2304.11 shall not be subject to interior finish requirements except in interior exit stairways, interior exit ramps, and exit passageways.

This section is simply intended to clarify the code regarding heavy timber, which is commonly exposed to the interior without any interior finish. The concerns over the contribution of heavy timber building elements to flame spread in a structure are dealt with in the general requirements of Chapter 6 and other provisions of the code that allow heavy timber.

803.4 Foam plastics. Foam plastics shall not be used as interior finish except as provided in Section 2603.9. This section shall apply both to exposed foam plastics and to foam plastics used in conjunction with a textile or vinyl facing or cover.

This section is simply intended to serve as a reminder that the provisions of Chapter 26 apply when the material is foam plastic. The special approval provisions of Section 2603.10 would be required in order to allow a foam plastic to be used in an exposed interior application. The special approval involves testing in accordance with NFPA 286, which is also used for acceptance of other materials in this section.

803.5 Textile wall coverings. Where used as interior wall finish materials, textile wall coverings, including materials having woven or nonwoven, napped, tufted, looped or similar surface and carpet and similar textile materials, shall be tested in the manner intended for use, using the product mounting system, including adhesive, and shall comply with the requirements of one of the following: Section 803.1.1, section 803.5.1 or section 803.5.2.

This section is primarily intended to apply to carpet and carpet-like wall coverings, which include textile materials having woven or nonwoven, napped, tufted, looped or similar surfaces. If not addressed, these easily ignitable materials can contribute extensively to a fire. There are three testing options for these coverings as given in Section 803.1.1, 803.5.1 or 803.5.2. In each case, it shall be tested in the manner intended for use, using the product mounting system, including adhesive.

803.5.1 Room corner test for textile wall coverings and expanded vinyl wall coverings. Textile wall coverings and expanded vinyl wall coverings shall meet the criteria of Section 803.5.1 when tested in the manner intended for use in accordance with the Method B protocol of NFPA 265 using the product-mounting system, including adhesive.

This particular section allows textile materials and expanded vinyl wall coverings when tested in accordance with Method B protocol of NFPA 265. NFPA 265 is known as a full-scale "room corner" fire test. Past research conducted with this kind of configuration has shown that flame spread indexes produced by ASTM E84 may not reliably predict the fire behavior of textile wall coverings. A more reliable test procedure was developed at the University of California and involved the use of a room corner fire test with a gas diffusion burner(s). The research findings are described in a report from the University of California Fire Research Laboratory titled, "Room Fire Experiments of Textile Wall Coverings." The NFPA 265 test method is only slightly different from NFPA 286. NFPA 286 is more severe in three ways:

The gas diffusion burner is used to expose the material on the wall in the room. The fire test starts with a heat release rate exposure of 40 kW for the first 5 minutes in both tests but is then followed by 150 kW for 10 minutes.

===== Page 0809 =====
in NFPA 265 and by 160 kW for 10 minutes in NFPA 286.

2 The gas burner is placed 50 mm away from each of the walls in NFPA 265, whereas it is placed flush against both walls in NFPA 286.

3 The test sample is mounted on the walls only in accordance with NFPA 265, while it is mounted both on the walls and ceiling in accordance with NFPA 286.

A key result of the difference in intensity and location of the gas burner is that the burner flame does not reach the ceiling during the 150-kW exposure (while it does reach the ceiling during the 160-kW exposure in NFPA 286). Therefore, NFPA 265 is not considered to be suitable for testing ceiling coverings.

Based on the use of test Method B from NFPA 265, the sample must meet the criteria of Section 803.1.3.1. This test helps to determine the contribution of textile wall coverings to overall fire growth and spread in a compartment fire. This test also exposes the textile to an ignition source while mounted on the wall. It should be noted that SBC 801 allows the use of test Method A or B in NFPA 265. The testing requirements in SBC 801 apply specifically to existing buildings. In the Method A test protocol, 600 mm-wide strips of the material are mounted on the two walls closest to the corner with the burner, whereas, in the Method B test protocol, the sample is mounted completely covering three walls (except for the wall containing the door). Therefore, Method B test protocol is more severe. As noted, these textiles are exposed to a prescribed heat release rate of 40 kW for 5 minutes, which is then followed by a heat release rate of 150 kW for 10 minutes.

## 803.5.1.1 Acceptance criteria for NFPA

265. The interior finish shall comply with the following:

1 During the 40-kW exposure, flames shall not spread to the ceiling.

2 The flame shall not spread to the outer extremities of the samples on the 2400 by 3600 mm walls.

3 Flashover, as defined in NFPA 265, shall not occur.

4 The total smoke released throughout the test shall not exceed 1,000 m².

To pass the Method B test protocol of NFPA 265, there are several criteria, including avoiding flash-over, as defined in the standard. See the commentary to Section 803.1.3, which discusses limitations on the flame spread of the sample in both the 40 kW and 160 kW exposure and limits the total smoke released to 1000 m², just as in NFPA 286.

803.5.2 Acceptance criteria for textile and expanded vinyl wall or ceiling coverings tested to ASTM E84 or UL 723. Textile wall and ceiling coverings and expanded vinyl wall and ceiling coverings shall have a Class A flame spread index in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 and be protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. Test specimen preparation and mounting shall be in accordance with ASTM E2404.

Textile wall coverings and expanded vinyl wall coverings dramatically increase the fuel load in a room. As such, additional protection is required as a safety factor for rooms finished with these types of material. ASTM E84 alone is not considered a sufficient test of the flame spread properties of textile wall coverings because they are too thin when tested, and thus sprinklers would be required in addition to a Class A flame spread rating as a safety factor.

803.6 Textile ceiling coverings. Where used as interior ceiling finish materials, textile ceiling coverings, including materials having woven or nonwoven, napped, tufted, looped or similar surface and carpet and similar textile materials, shall be tested in the manner intended for use, using the product mounting system, including adhesive, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.1 or 803.5.2.

This section recognizes that the methods for attaching interior finishes could contribute to the flame spread characteristics of the interior finish material. For textile ceiling coverings, the variety of adhesives and mounting methods are such that the entire system needs to be tested in the Steiner tunnel tests or the room corner test specified in Section 803.1.1 or 803.5.2.

803.7 Expanded vinyl wall coverings. Where used as interior wall finish materials, expanded vinyl wall coverings shall be tested in the manner intended for use, using the product mounting system, including adhesive, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.1, 803.5.1 or 803.5.2.

This section recognizes that the methods for attaching interior finishes could contribute to the flame spread characteristics of the interior finish material. For expanded vinyl wall coverings, there are three testing options as described in Sections 803.1.1, 803.5.1 and 803.5.2.

803.8 Expanded vinyl ceiling coverings. Where used as interior ceiling finish materials, expanded vinyl ceiling coverings shall be tested in the manner intended for use, using the product mounting system, including adhesive, and shall comply with

===== Page 0810 =====
the requirements of Section 803.1.1 or section 803.5.2.

This section recognizes that the methods for attaching interior finishes could contribute to the flame spread characteristics of the interior finish material. For expanded vinyl ceiling coverings, the variety of adhesives and mounting methods are such that the entire system needs to be tested in the Steiner tunnel tests or the room corner test specified in Section 803.1.1 or 803.5.2.

803.9 High-density polyethylene (HDPE) and polypropylene (PP). Where high-density polyethylene or polypropylene is used as an interior finish it shall comply with Section 803.1.1.

High-density polyethylene (HDPE) and polypropylene (PP) are thermoplastic materials that, when burned, give off considerable energy and produce flammable liquid fires. Recent full-scale room corner tests using NFPA 286 have demonstrated a significant hazard with some of these (HDPE) materials. Extensive flammable liquid fires occurred during the tests. The Steiner tunnel test, however, is not a suitable measure of the performance of this material because the calculation of flame spread index does not take into account the unique hazards known for this material. Therefore, these materials are required to be tested in a full-scale room corner test in accordance with Section 803.1.1.

803.10 Site-fabricated stretch systems. Where used as interior wall or interior ceiling finish materials, site-fabricated stretch systems containing all three components described in the definition in Chapter 2 shall be tested in the manner intended for use, and shall comply with the requirements of Section 803.1.1 or with the requirements of Class A in accordance with Section 803.1.2. If the materials are tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723, specimen preparation and mounting shall be in accordance with ASTM E2573.

These systems are being used extensively because they can stretch to cover decorative walls and ceilings with unusual shapes. The systems consist of three parts: a fabric (or vinyl), a frame and an infill core material. Those systems need to be tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 and meet Class A requirements for flame spread and smoke development. The ASTM E05 committee on fire standards has issued a standard practice, ASTM E2573, for specimen preparation and mounting of site-fabricated stretch systems.

803.11 Laminated products factory produced with a wood substrate. Laminated products factory produced with a wood substrate shall comply with one of the following:
1 The laminated product shall meet the criteria of Section 803.1.1 when tested in accordance with NFPA 286 using the product-mounting system, including adhesive, as described in Section 5.8 of NFPA 286.

2 The laminated product shall have a Class A, B, or C flame spread index and smoke-developed index, based on the requirements of Table 803.13, in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Test specimen preparation and mounting shall be in accordance with ASTM E2579.

This section provides the product testing requirements for the use of laminated products with an attached wood substrate as interior wall or ceiling finishes. This section allows the use of either NFPA 286 or ASTM E84. As noted, the ASTM E2579 mounting method must be applied if the ASTM E84 test method is chosen.

803.12 Facings or wood veneers intended to be applied on site over a wood substrate. Facings or veneers intended to be applied on site over a wood substrate shall comply with one of the following:

1 The facing or veneer shall meet the criteria of Section 803.1.1.1 when tested in accordance with NFPA 286 using the product mounting system, including adhesive, as described in Section 5.9 of NFPA 286.

2 The facing or veneer shall have a Class A, B or C flame spread index and smoke-developed index, based on the requirements of Table 803.13, in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Test specimen preparation and mounting shall be in accordance with ASTM E2404.

This section addresses the correct mounting method for wall coverings in ASTM E84 (namely ASTM E2404), to detail the proper way to test facings or wood veneers intended to be applied over a wood substrate. They are to be treated the same way as any other wall or ceiling covering applied "on site" to a wood substrate, but differently from panels where the facing or veneer is applied in the factory over the wood substrate and the entire panel is installed. The previous section addresses this situation. This section allows the use of either NFPA 286 or ASTM E84. As noted, the ASTM E2404 mounting method must be applied if the ASTM E84 test method is chosen.

803.13 Interior finish requirements based on group. Interior wall and ceiling finish shall have a flame spread index not greater than that specified in Table 803.13 for the group and location designated. Interior wall and ceiling finish materials tested in accordance with NFPA 286 and meeting the

===== Page 0811 =====
acceptance criteria of Section 803.1.1.1, shall be permitted to be used where a Class A classification in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723 is required.

The requirements for flame spread indexes for interior finish materials applied to walls and ceilings are contained in Table 803.13 (see Sections 804 and 805 for floor finish requirements). The referenced test for determining flame spread indexes is ASTM E84 or UL 723, which establishes a relative measurement of flame spread across the surface of the material. The classifications used in Table 803.13 are defined in Section 803.1. See the commentary to Section 803.1 for additional information on the uses and limitations of the test procedure. This section also allows the use of NFPA 286 as noted in the exception to Section 803.1 and Section 803.2 (without the exception). Section 803.5, in particular, states that materials that pass NFPA 286 in accordance with the pass/fail criteria in Section 803.2.1 can be used as an alternative to ASTM E84. Passing NFPA 286 means that the material would be considered equivalent to Class A. In other words, it can be used as a replacement for all categories, as Class A is the most restrictive (see commentary, Section 803.1.2 for more detail on the test).

When evaluating test reports, the method of application and substrate material are considered. For example, adhesives that soften at moderate temperatures will allow wall or ceiling finishes to drop or peel. This not only increases the susceptibility of the material to ignition but also exposes the substrate material. The substrate material can also affect the interior finish rating of the surface material. It is not uncommon for a thin, combustible finish applied to a noncombustible material to obtain a low flame spread index, while the same material applied to a combustible substrate or applied without a substrate could exhibit a significantly high tendency to spread flame.

## See Table 803.13.

This table prescribes the minimum requirements for interior finishes applied to walls and ceilings. Class A material has the most restrictive flame spread index and Class C has the least restrictive flame spread index. Therefore, the use of a Class A material in an area that requires a minimum Class B material is always allowed. Likewise, when the table requires Class C materials, Classes A and B can also be used.

The requirements are based on the use of the space. To determine the applicable criteria, first determine whether the space is an exit stairway, ramp or passageway; a corridor, exit access stairway or ramp; or a room or enclosed space. For definitions of these various spaces, see Chapter 2. For the minimum requirements for these spaces, see Chapter 10.

Interior finishes in spaces that are not separated from a corridor (for example, waiting areas in business or health care facilities) must comply with the requirements for a corridor space. As shown in the table, the code places more emphasis on the allowable flame spread index for exits than for enclosed rooms because of the critical nature and relative importance that is placed on maintaining the integrity of exits to evacuate the building.

Numerous notes amend the basic requirements of Table 803.13. Notes a through m apply only where they are specifically referenced in the table.

803.14 Stability. Interior finish materials regulated by this chapter shall be applied or otherwise fastened in such a manner that such materials will not readily become detached where subjected to room temperatures of  \( 93^{\circ} \) C for not less than 30 minutes.

Interior finishes are not to become detached under exposure to elevated temperatures ( \( 93^{\circ} \) C) for 30 minutes. There is not a standard test method yet developed to evaluate this requirement. Other sections of the code, however, offer some additional guidance. For example, the performance of the method of attachment of finish materials during a fire-resistance test will usually be an adequate indication of performance. Section 2506 contains requirements for gypsum wallboard that is not part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly. Interior finishes that become detached may add to the spread of fire, as well as create a hazard for fire fighters.

803.15 Application of interior finish materials to fire-resistance-rated or noncombustible building elements. Where interior/finish materials are applied on walls, ceilings or structural elements required to have a fire-resistance rating or to be of noncombustible construction, these finish materials shall comply with the provisions of this section.

Where an assembly is required to have a fire-resistance rating or be of noncombustible materials, interior finish materials are required to be applied in accordance with Sections 803.4.1 through 803.4.4. These methods are to prevent other types of fire spread onto the exposed surface through the use of fireblocking and similar methods.

803.15.1 Direct attachment and furred construction. Where walls, ceilings or structural elements are required by any provision in this code to be of fire-resistance-rated or noncombustible

===== Page 0812 =====
construction, the interior finish material shall be applied directly against such construction or to furring strips not exceeding 44 mm, applied directly against such surfaces.

Interior finish materials are required to be applied directly to the exposed surface of structural elements or to the furring attached to such surfaces. By applying the finish directly to the surface, the potential for the back side to contribute to a fire is diminished and, as a result, the effects on the fire-resistance rating and the creation of combustible cavities in noncombustible walls are minimized.

803.15.1.1 Fured construction. If the interior finish material is applied to furring strips, the intervening spaces between such furring strips shall comply with one of the following:

1 Be filled with material that is inorganic or noncombustible.

2 Be filled with material that meets the requirements of a Class A material in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or 803.1.2; or

3 Be fire-blocked at a maximum of 2.4 m in every direction in accordance with Section 718.

Exception:

Compliance with Item 1, 2 or 3 is not required where the materials used to create the concealed space are noncombustible.

Interior finishes are allowed to be applied to furring strips under specific limitations. All concealed spaces created by furring are to be fireblocked at a maximum of 2.4 m intervals in any direction. Likewise, fireblocks in furred construction also diminish the likelihood of fire involvement between the finish and the interior wall surface. The use of wood nailing strips is intended to be limited to that which is necessary for the installation of finish and trim materials. As such, the amount of combustible material is restricted so that the performance of the element to which it is attached will not be adversely affected. It should be noted that the type of construction classification of the building is not intended to regulate the combustibility of the interior finish materials. The fire performance characteristics of the interior finish materials are regulated by Section 803.1.

803.15.2 Set-out construction. Where walls and ceilings are required to be of fire-resistance-rated or noncombustible construction and walls are set out or ceilings are dropped distances greater than specified in Section 803.15.1, Class A finish materials, in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or 803.1.2, shall be used.

Exceptions:

1. Where interior finish materials are protected on both sides by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2.

2. Where interior finish materials are attached to non-combustible backing or furring strips installed as specified in Section 803.15.1.1.

3. Where the combustible void is filled with a non-combustible material.

This section specifies that materials with the most restrictive flame spread index be used in fire-resistance-rated or noncombustible walls and ceilings that are set out or dropped beyond the parameters of Section 803.15.1. Exceptions 1 and 2 describe alternatives to providing the Class A finish material. The first is to provide the protection afforded by an automatic sprinkler system. Note that this protection is required on each side of the finish material. The second is to secure the finish to noncombustible backing or furring strips in accordance with Section 803.15.1.1 (see Commentary Figure 803.15.2).

803.15.2.1 Hangers and assembly members. The hangers and assembly members of such dropped ceilings that are below the horizontal fire-resistance-rated floor or roof assemblies shall be of noncombustible materials. The construction of each set-out wall and horizontal fire-resistance-rated floor or roof assembly shall be of fire-resistance-rated construction as required elsewhere in this code.

Exception: In Type III and V construction, fire-retardant-treated wood shall be permitted for use as hangers and assembly members of dropped ceilings.

The hangers and assembly members of dropped ceilings that are below the main ceiling line are required to be noncombustible materials to ensure that the ceiling will remain in place for some time if a fire occurs. The exception allows fire-retardant-treated wood (FRTW) in Types III and V construction. This is consistent with other provisions in the code dealing with options to noncombustible materials used in Type III and V construction.

803.15.3 Heavy timber construction. Wall and ceiling finishes of all classes as permitted in this Chapter that are installed directly against the wood decking or planking of heavy timber construction in Section 602.4.4.2 or 2304.11 or to wood furring strips applied directly to the wood decking or

===== Page 0813 =====
planning shall be fireblocked as specified in Section 803.15.1.1.

Attachment directly to heavy timber decking or planking eliminates concealed spaces (see Section 803.3). Furing strips of any depth are allowed when concealed spaces are treated according to Section 803.15.1.1. Again, the intent is to reduce the likelihood of fire spread between these spaces.

803.15.4 Materials. An interior wall or ceiling finish material that is not more than 6.5 mm thick shall be applied directly onto the wall, ceiling or structural element without the use of furring strips and shall not be suspended away from the building element to which that finish material it is applied.

## Exceptions:

1. Non-combustible interior finish materials.

2. Materials that meet the requirements of Class A materials in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or 803.1.2 where the qualifying tests were made with the material furred out from the non-combustible backing shall be permitted to be used with furring strips.

3. Materials that meet the requirements of Class A materials in accordance with Section 803.1.1 or 803.1.2 where the qualifying tests were made with the material suspended away from the non-combustible backing shall be permitted to be used suspended away from the building element.

Combustible materials that have a maximum thickness of 6.5 mm are required to be applied directly against a noncombustible backing and not to an added substrate or furred away from the backing, which may significantly increase the spread of fire (see Commentary Figure 803.15.4). Exception 1 allows noncombustible interior finish materials to be furred away from the noncombustible backing. Exceptions 2 and 3 allow materials that, in tests, perform similarly to directly attached materials where furred or suspended from a noncombustible backing, respectively.

## SECTION 804 INTERIOR FLOOR FINISH
804.1 General. Interior floor finish and floor

covering materials shall comply with Sections 804.2 through 804.4.2.

Exception: Floor finishes and coverings of a traditional type, such as wood, vinyl, linoleum or terrazzo, and resilient floor covering materials that are not comprised of fibers.

This section regulates the design and installation of floor finish and floor covering materials. Traditional floor coverings such as wood, vinyl, terrazzo and other resilient floor covering material must be exempt from this section. Smooth-surface floor coverings generally contribute minimally to a fire. The focus is more on textile floor coverings, such as carpets.

804.2 Classification. Interior floor finish and floor covering materials required by Section 804.4.2 to be of Class I or II materials shall be classified in accordance with ASTM E648 or NFPA 253. The classification referred to herein corresponds to the classifications determined by ASTM E648 or NFPA 253 as follows: Class I, 0.45 watts/cm \( ^{2} \)  or greater; Class II, 0.22 watts/cm \( ^{2} \)  or greater.

The use of a classification system eliminates the need to state the actual critical radiant flux value for a product to meet the identification requirements of Section 804. Over the years, a classification system has been found to be much easier for the industry to follow and still provides the building official with the information required to verify compliance. There are two test options to measure the combustibility of floor coverings: ASTM E648 or NFPA 253. These standards are radiant floor panel tests, which basically simulate materials subjected to heat from a fire above. The primary concern with flooring is related to the spread of a fire that has already been ignited within a space or room to a different room. Commentary Figure 804.2 shows the test apparatus for NFPA 253. The critical heat flux indicates the threshold value above which flame spread occurs in the testing environment.

804.3 Testing and identification. Interior floor finish and floor covering materials shall be tested by an agency in accordance with ASTM E648 or NFPA 253 and identified by a hang tag or other suitable method so as to identify the manufacturer or supplier and style, and shall indicate the interior floor finish or floor covering classification in accordance with Section 804.3. Carpet-type floor coverings shall be tested as proposed for use, including underlayment. Test reports confirming the information provided in the manufacturer's product identification shall be furnished to the building official upon request.

The only method to ascertain that a floor meets the criteria of this section is to request a copy of the test report for the specific material being installed. Therefore, it is critical that the carpeting be properly identified in order to verify that acceptable materials are being provided in the appropriate locations. The identification is to be provided on the material

===== Page 0814 =====
itself since a manufacturer's designation is required.

804.4 Interior floor finish requirements. Interior floor covering materials shall comply with Sections 804.4.1 and 804.4.2 and interior floor finish materials shall comply with Section 804.4.2.

Regardless of occupancy, all interior floor covering materials need to comply with one of two test requirements as indicated in Section 804.4.1, both of which deal with ignition performance of the floor covering. The finish flooring requirements for means of egress components, such as enclosed exit stairways and ramps, exit passageways, corridors and spaces open to the corridor, are regarded as more critical than other building floor surfaces. As such, these finishes and coverings are also required to comply with the minimum critical radiant flux provisions in Section 804.4.2.

804.4.1 Test requirement. In all occupancies, interior floor covering materials shall comply with ASTM D2859.

This section contains two test methods for interior floor covering materials: DOC FF-1 and ASTM D2859. ASTM D2859 has been determined to be equivalent to DOC FF-1 and can be used as an alternative test method. Both test methods essentially evaluate the performance of the floor covering when subject to a cigarette-type ignition by using a small methenamine tablet.

804.4.2 Minimum critical radiant flux. In all occupancies, interior floor finish and floor covering materials in enclosures for stairways and ramps, exit passageways, corridors and rooms or spaces not separated from corridors by partitions extending from the floor to the underside of the ceiling shall withstand a minimum critical radiant flux. The minimum critical radiant flux shall be not less than Class I in Groups I-1, I-2 and I-3 and not less than Class II in Groups A, B, E, H, I-4, M, R-1, R-2 and S.

Exception: Where a building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, Class II materials are permitted in any area where Class I materials are required, and materials complying with DOC FF-1 "pill test" (CPSC 16 CFR Part 1630) or with ASTM D2859 are permitted in any area where Class II materials are required.

This section prescribes the minimum requirements for interior floor finish materials used in enclosed exit stairways and ramps, passageways, corridors and rooms or spaces open to the corridor. The criteria are based on the occupancy classification and the relationship of the space to the egress system. Similar to Table 803.13, the occupancy classification designation is meant to apply to the actual occupancy of the space and not necessarily the overall building classification. Classifications I and II, as used in this section, are defined in Section 804.2 and are based on the results of the NFPA 253 test procedure. Recognizing the ability of automatic sprinkler systems to control a fire and the minimal contribution of interior floor finishes to the early stages of fire growth, the exception allows the required interior floor finish ratings to be reduced when an automatic sprinkler system is provided throughout the building. The reference to Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 clarifies that the system is to be installed in accordance with NFPA 13 or 13R. In cases where Class II materials are required and an automatic sprinkler system is provided, the minimum requirement is that the material meet either the DOC FF-1 or the ASTM D2859 test criteria. For a discussion of these two methods, see the commentary to Section 804.4.1.

## SECTION 805 COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS IN TYPES I AND II CONSTRUCTION

805.1 Application. Combustible materials installed on or embedded in floors of buildings of Type I or II construction shall comply with Sections 805.1.1 through 805.1.3.

Exception: Stages and platforms constructed in accordance with Sections 410.2 and 410.3, respectively.

This section provides several methods of allowing combustible materials in the floors of Type I or II construction. Generally, the focus is on fire spread in concealed spaces. If not properly addressed, combustible floor surfaces may eventually contribute to a fire within a concealed space. Sections 410.2 and 410.3 permit wood flooring in stages.

805.1.1 Subfloor construction. Floor sleepers, bucks and nailing blocks shall not be constructed of combustible materials, unless the space between the fire-resistance-rated floor assembly and the flooring is either solidly filled with noncombustible materials or fireblocked in accordance with Section 718, and provided that such open spaces shall not extend under or through permanent partitions or walls.

Sleepers, bucks and nailing blocks are permitted to be of combustible materials only where the void space is filled with a noncombustible material or is fireblocked in accordance with Section 718. Section 718 permits a maximum concealed space area of

===== Page 0815 =====
9.3 m². In either case, the open spaces cannot extend under or through permanent partitions or walls. The purpose of the fill or fireblocking is to reduce the impact of a fire in a concealed combustible space in the floor. Likewise, fire spread around partitions or walls through the concealed space in the floor is also intended to be prevented.

805.1.2 Wood finish flooring. Wood finish flooring is permitted to be attached directly to the embedded or fireblocked wood sleepers and shall be permitted where cemented directly to the top surface of fire-resistance-rated floor assemblies or directly to a wood subfloor attached to sleepers as provided for in Section 805.1.1.

Wood floor finish materials may be applied directly to the wood sleepers, provided that the space is protected in accordance with Section 805.1.1. Wood floor finish materials may also be applied directly to the top surface of a fire-resistance-rated assembly or directly to a wood subfloor that is attached to sleepers that are either fireblocked or provide noncombustible fill between the sleepers in accordance with Section 805.1.1.

805.1.3 Insulating boards. Combustible insulating boards not more than 12.5 mm thick and covered with finish flooring are permitted where attached directly to a noncombustible floor assembly or to wood subflooring attached to sleepers as provided for in Section 805.1.1.

The addition of combustible insulating boards with a maximum thickness of 12.5 mm will not significantly increase the fuel load when applied as prescribed by this section or attached to sleepers as provided for in Section 805.1.1.

In all occupancies, interior floor finish in exit enclosures, exit passageways, exit access corridors and rooms or spaces not separated from exit access corridors by full-height partitions extending from the floor to the underside of the ceiling must withstand a minimum critical radiant flux as specified in Section 804.4.2. The focus surrounding the critical radiant flux is combustibility and potential for flame spread of the exposed materials. Section 805 focuses on fire spread through concealed spaces created by floors.

## SECTION 806 DECORATIVE MATERIALS AND TRIM

806.1 General. The following requirements shall apply to all occupancies:

1 Furnishings or decorative materials of an explosive or highly flammable character shall not be used.

2 Fire-retardant coatings in existing buildings shall be maintained so as to retain the effectiveness of the treatment under service conditions encountered in actual use.

3 Furnishings or other objects shall not be placed to obstruct exits, access thereto, egress therefrom or visibility thereof.

4 The permissible amount of decorative vegetation and noncombustible decorative materials shall not be limited.

The requirements in this section apply to decorative materials other than decorative vegetation. The bulk of the requirements in this section are applicable to all groups. Section 806.2 is applicable to most groups except Group I-3. Section 806.6 is applicable to Group A occupancies. Decorative materials must be noncombustible or meet the flame propagation performance criteria of Section 806.4 and NFPA 701. Where decorative materials are classified as noncombustible, it is presumed that they will contribute little, if at all, to the growth and spread of fire. Therefore, the quantity of noncombustible decorative materials is not limited.

806.2 Combustible decorative materials. In other than Group I-3, curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and similar combustible decorative materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall comply with Section 806.4 and shall not exceed 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling area to which such materials are attached.

Fixed or movable walls and partitions, paneling, wall pads and crash pads applied structurally or for decoration, acoustical correction, surface insulation or other purposes shall be considered interior finish shall comply with Section 803 and shall not be considered decorative materials or furnishings.

Exceptions:

1. In auditoriums in Group A, the permissible amount of curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and similar combustible decorative materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall not exceed 75 percent of the aggregate wall area where the building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, and where the material is installed in accordance with Section 803.15 of this code.

2. In Group R-2 dormitories, within sleeping units and dwelling units, the permissible amount of curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and similar decorative materials suspended from walls or ceiling shall not exceed 50 percent of the aggregate wall areas where the building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic

===== Page 0816 =====
sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.

3. In Group B and M occupancies, the amount of combustible fabric partitions suspended from the ceiling and not supported by the floor shall comply with Section 806.4 and shall not be limited.

4. The 10-percent limit shall not apply to curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and similar combustible decorative materials used as window coverings.

In any occupancy classification where a movable wall, partition, paneling, wall pads or crash pads cover larger areas, they need to be dealt with as interior finishes instead of as decorative materials. Such areas would not be considered decorative materials where the area covered is greater than 10 percent of the wall or ceiling area. This is clarified in the paragraph addressing Exception 3. Meeting the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 does not mean that materials will not burn, only that they are going to spread flame relatively slowly. These materials are, therefore, limited to a maximum of 10 percent of the total wall and ceiling area of the space under consideration. Unlike incidental trim, decorative materials are not necessarily distributed evenly throughout the room. Additionally, consideration of the long-term maintenance of the materials, including possible periodic retreatment, should be taken into account.

There are two exceptions to the 10-percent limitation in Section 806.2. Exception 1 is for Group A auditoriums and would allow 75-percent coverage of the walls and ceilings (instead of the limit of 10 percent) if the space is sprinkled in accordance with NFPA 13 and the material is applied in accordance with Section 803.4. Exception 2 correlates with the general requirements in Section 806.1 and further emphasizes that an unlimited amount of fabric ceiling partitions are allowed as long as they meet the flame propagation performance of NFPA 701.

Exception 3 of this section also clarifies that, in Group B and M occupancies, fabric partitions suspended from the ceiling but not physically contacting the floor should be treated as decorative materials similar to curtains or draperies and comply with the flame propagation performance heat release criteria of Section 806.4.

Exception 4 provides specific clarification that the 10-percent limit does not apply to combustible materials that are used specifically as window coverings.
806.3 Occupancy-based requirements. Occupancy-based requirements for combustible decorative materials, other than decorative vegetation, not complying with Section 806.4 shall comply with Sections 807.5.1 through 807.5.6 of SBC 801.

The provisions of Sections 807.5.1 through 807.5.6 of SBC 801 address the vulnerability of occupants by addressing hazards likely found in certain occupancies. Refer to the commentary for these sections for further information.

806.4 Acceptance criteria and reports. Where required to exhibit improved fire performance, curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and similar combustible decorative materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall be tested by an approved agency and meet the flame propagation performance criteria of Test 1 or 2, as appropriate, of NFPA 701, or exhibit a maximum heat release rate of 100 kW when tested in accordance with NFPA 289, using the 20-kW ignition source. Reports of test results shall be prepared in accordance with the test method used and furnished to the building official upon request.

One of the standard test methods to be used to evaluate the ability of a material to propagate flame is NFPA 701, which contains two test methods. Test 1 is a less severe test than Test 2 and uses smaller test specimens. Test 1 is intended for lighter-weight materials and single-layer fabrics: the limit is a linear density of  \( 700 \, g/m^2 \) . Test 2 is more severe than Test 1 and uses larger test specimens. It is intended for higher-density materials and multilayered fabrics. It also applies to vinyl-coated fabric blackout linings and lined draperies using any density, because they have been shown to give misleading results using Test 1. NFPA 701 sets out the types of materials, including fabrics, that should be tested using each method.

Essentially, NFPA 701 provides a mechanism to distinguish between materials that allow flames to spread quickly and those that do not when using a small fire exposure.

Materials tested only to NFPA 701 are not permitted for use as interior finish materials, but instead are generally used as shades, swags, curtains and other similar materials. These tests are used to determine whether materials propagate flame beyond the area exposed to the ignition source. They are not intended to indicate whether the material tested will resist the propagation of flame under fire exposures more extreme than the test conditions.

The other standard test method that can be used is NFPA 289. This test method quantifies the contribution of materials to heat and smoke

===== Page 0817 =====
release when subjected to different ignition sources. This test method also determines the potential for growth of a fire and the fire spread of a given material when exposed to an ignition source in a controlled environment.

806.5 Foam plastic. Foam plastic used as trim in any occupancy shall comply with Section 2604.2.

This section establishes that some dense foam plastic materials may be used as interior trim if the thickness, width and area of coverage are specifically limited as required in Section 2604.2.

Section 2604.2 provides the following maximum values: 12.5 mm thickness, 200 mm width and 10 percent of the aggregate wall and ceiling area. Section 2604.2 also establishes a minimum density for foam permitted for use as trim: 320 kg per m \( ^{3} \) . Minimum instead of maximum density is specified because the denser the foam plastic material, the less likely it is that it will generate misleading ASTM E84 test results due to having insufficient material for fire testing of the foam [see Commentary Figure 806.5].

This section specifically calls out a numerical flame spread index limitation of 75 for foam plastic used as trim, which is a Class B flame spread index. No thermal barrier is required for the use of foam plastic as trim and the smoke-developed index is not limited. It should be noted that Section 803.7.3 of SBC 801, which regulates the use of foam plastic trim for existing construction, has essentially identified requirements to those found in this section. Neither this section nor Section 2603.4.1.11 requires a thermal barrier for interior trim.

806.6 Pyroxilin plastic. Imitation leather or other material consisting of or coated with a pyroxilin, or similarly hazardous base shall not be used in Group A occupancies.

Use of pyroxilin plastics, also known as cellulose nitrate plastics, as imitation leather (or coated to imitation leather) is strictly prohibited in Group A occupancies because of the normally high occupant loads of such occupancies. This type of material is very hazardous because it has the potential to develop explosive atmospheres with high heat emission and it will begin decomposition at temperatures starting at  \( 149^{\circ} \) C. In actual fact, cellulose nitrate use has generally declined considerably because it tends to become somewhat unstable and is easily ignitable. Specifically, use of cellulose nitrate for motion picture film was discontinued in 1951.

806.7 Interior trim. Material, other than foam plastic used as interior trim, shall have a minimum Class C flame spread and smoke-developed index when tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723, as described in Section 803.1.2. Combustible trim, excluding handrails and guardrails, shall not exceed 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling area in which it is attached.

In occupancies of any group, unless otherwise noted in the code, the minimum classification of all trim must be Class C. Additionally, combustible trim must not exceed 10 percent of the aggregate wall or ceiling area. The 10-percent calculation does not need to include handrails and guardrails. Although a Class C rating may be lower than the rating required for a particular building or facility, this quantity of combustible material will not significantly increase the fuel load and flame spread hazards [see Commentary Figure 806.7].

806.8 Interior floor-wall base. Interior floor-wall base that is 150 mm or less in height shall be tested in accordance with Section 804.2 and shall be not less than Class II. Where a Class I floor finish is required, the floor-wall base shall be Class I.

Exception: Interior trim materials that comply with Section 806.7.

Section 806.8 addresses the issue of testing and regulation of interior floor-wall base trim materials. In many cases, the floor covering material is just seamlessly turned up or used at the intersection of the floor and the wall and thus it becomes the floor-wall base trim.

In the 2006 code, these materials could have been considered interior trim in accordance with Sections 804.1 and 806.7 and would have been required to be tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 723, even though the floor covering may have been required to be tested in accordance with NFPA 253.

The testing apparatus and specimen mounting requirements of ASTM E84 make it difficult to obtain reliable test results for these smaller floor-wall base profiles. Because of their location, at the floor line, floor-wall base materials are not likely to be involved in a fire until the floor covering is also involved, usually at room flashover. Thus, it is reasonable that floor-wall base materials meet the same criteria as floor coverings. The section specifies that floor-wall base materials 150 mm or less in height be tested in accordance with NFPA 253, and the proposal provides requirements for this application.

806.9 Combustible lockers. Where lockers constructed of combustible materials are used, the lockers shall be considered to be interior finish and shall comply with Section 803.

Exception: Lockers constructed entirely of wood and noncombustible materials shall be permitted to be used wherever interior finish materials are required to meet a Class C classification in

===== Page 0818 =====
accordance with Section 803.1.2.

Lockers are often included in building plans (such as in schools) and they should be checked at the time of issuing the certificate of occupancy instead of waiting until after the building is in use. Where lockers constructed of combustible materials are used, the lockers shall be considered to be interior finish and shall comply with wall and ceiling finishes requirements included in Section 803.

The exception allows lockers constructed of wood and noncombustible materials where interior finish materials meet specific requirements for flame spread and smoke development.

## SECTION 807 INSULATION

807.1 Insulation. Thermal and acoustical insulation shall comply with Section 720.

This section simply references Section 720 for the requirements for insulation materials and clarifies that these materials can be used when they meet the requirements of that section.

## SECTION 808 ACOUSTICAL CEILING SYSTEMS

808.1 Acoustical ceiling systems. The quality, design, fabrication and erection of metal suspension systems for acoustical tile and lay-in panel ceilings in buildings or structures shall conform to generally accepted engineering practice, the provisions of this chapter and other applicable requirements of this code.

This section regulates the design and installation of metal suspension systems for acoustical tile and acoustical lay-in panel ceilings. Suspended ceiling systems basically consist of a grid of metal channels or T-bars suspended by steel hangers (wires, rods or flats) from the structure above. Light fixtures, air diffusers and acoustical panels may be placed between the metal framing members.

808.1.1 Materials and installation. Acoustical materials complying with the interior finish requirements of Section 803 shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and applicable provisions for applying interior finish.

Acoustical materials used in metal suspension systems are regulated for the purpose of limiting flame spread and smoke development in the occupancies shown in Table 803.13.

Metal suspension system components for acoustical ceilings that might be subjected to the severe environmental conditions of high humidity (fog), or salt spray may have coatings ranked according to their ability to protect the components from deterioration. The installation of metal suspension systems in any exterior application must be considered as an
installation in a severe environment (see ASTM C635).

808.1.1.1 Suspended acoustical ceilings. Suspended acoustical ceiling systems shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of ASTM C635 and ASTM C636.

ASTM C635 covers metal ceiling suspension systems used primarily to support acoustical tile or acoustical lay-in panels. Suspension systems have three structural classifications, as described below:

Light-duty systems—Used primarily for residential and light commercial structures where ceiling loads other than acoustical tile or lay-in panels are not anticipated.

- Intermediate-duty systems—Used primarily for ordinary commercial structures where some ceiling loads, due to light fixtures and air diffusers, are anticipated.

- Heavy-duty systems—Used primarily for commercial structures in which the quantities and weights of ceiling fixtures (lights, air diffusers, etc.) are greater than those for an ordinary commercial structure.

ASTM C636 covers the installation of suspension systems for acoustical tile and lay-in panels. While the practices described in this standard have equal application to fire-resistance-rated suspension systems, additional requirements may be imposed to obtain the fire endurance classification of particular floor/celling or roof/ceiling assemblies (see Section 808.1.1.2).

## 808.1.1.2 Fire-resistance-rated

construction. Acoustical ceiling systems that are part of fire-resistance-rated construction shall be installed in the same manner used in the assembly tested and shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 7.

A suspended acoustical ceiling system by itself does not possess a fire-resistance rating. Acoustical ceiling systems are part of an assembly that has a specified fire-resistance rating. Acoustical lay-in panels must remain in place for the tested assembly to be effective.

===== Page 0819 =====
## Bibliography

The following resource materials were used in the preparation of the commentary for this chapter of the code:

1 ASTM C635-13, Specification for the Manufacture, Performance, and Testing of Metal Suspension Systems for Acoustical Tile and Lay-In Panel Ceilings. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2013.

2 ASTM D2859-06(2011), Standard Test Method for Ignition Characteristics of Finished Textile Floor Covering Materials. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2011.

3 ASTM E84-13A, Test Method for Surface-burning Characteristics of Building Materials. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International, 2013.

4 DOC FF-1 (CPSC 16 CFR, Part 1630-07), Standard for the Surface Flammability of Carpets and Rugs. Bethesda, MD: Consumer Product Safety Commission, 2007.

5 Fisher, F.L., B. McCracken and R.B. Williamson. “Room Fire Experiments of Textile Wall Coverings, Final Report of All Materials Tested Between March 1985 and January 1986.” Service to Industry Report. ES-7853, Report 86-2, p.142. Berkley, CA: California University, March 1986.

6 NFPA 253-11, Test for Critical Radiant Flux of Floor Covering Systems Using a Radiant Heat Energy Source. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2011.

7 NFPA 265-11, Standard Fire Tests for Evaluating Room Fire Growth Contribution of Textile Wall Coverings. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2011.

8 NFPA 286-11, Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Evaluating Contribution of Wall and Ceiling Interior Finish to Room Fire Growth. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2011.

9 NFPA 701-2010, Standard Methods of Fire Tests for Flame Propagation of Textiles and Films. Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association, 2010.

10 UL 723-2008, Standard for Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials—with Revisions through May 2005. Northbrook, IL: Underwriters Laboratories Inc., 2008.

===== Page 0820 =====
## TABLES AND FIGURES OF CHAPTER 8

TABLE 803.13

INTERIOR WALL AND CEILING FINISH REQUIREMENTS BY OCCUPANCY \( ^{k} \)

<table><td rowspan="2">Group<td colspan="3">SPRINKLERED \( ^{1} \)<td colspan="3">NONSPRINKLEREDInterior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways \( ^{a,b} \)Corridors and enclosure for exit access stairways and rampsRooms and enclosed spaces \( ^{c} \)Interior exit stairways and ramps and exit passageways \( ^{a,b} \)Corridors and enclosure for exit access stairways and rampsRooms and enclosed spaces \( ^{c} \)A-1 &amp; A-2BBCAA \( ^{d} \)B \( ^{e} \)A-3 \( ^{f} \) , A-4, A-5BBCAA \( ^{d} \)CB, E, M, R-1BC \( ^{m} \)CABCR-4BCCABBFCCCBCCHBBC \( ^{g} \)AABI-1BCCABBI-2BBB \( ^{h} \)AABI-3AA \( ^{j} \)CAABI-4BBB \( ^{h} \)AABR-2CCCBBCR-3CCCCCCSCCCBBCU<td colspan="3">No Restriction<td colspan="3">No restriction</table>

a. Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted for wainscotting or paneling of not more than 93 square meter of applied surface area in the grade lobby where applied directly to a noncombustible base or over furnishing strips applied to a noncombustible base and fireblocked as required by Section 803.15.1.

b. In other than Group I-3 occupancies in buildings less than three stories above grade plane, Class B interior finish for nonsprinklered buildings and Class C interior finish for sprinklered buildings shall be permitted in interior exit stairways and ramps.

c. Requirements for rooms and enclosed spaces shall be based upon spaces enclosed by partitions. Where a fire-resistance rating is required for structural elements, the enclosing partitions shall extend from the floor to the ceiling. Partitions that do not comply with this shall be considered enclosing spaces and the rooms or spaces on both sides shall be considered one. In determining the applicable requirements for rooms and enclosed spaces, the specific occupancy thereof shall be the governing factor regardless of the group classification of the building or structure.

d. Lobby areas in Group A-1, A-2 and A-3 occupancies shall not be less than Class B materials.

e. Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted in places of assembly with an occupant load of 300 persons or less.

f. **Not applicable.

g. Class B material is required where the building exceeds two stories.

h. Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted in administrative spaces.

i. Class C interior finish materials shall be permitted in rooms with a capacity of four persons or less.

j. Class B materials shall be permitted as wainscotting extending not more than 1.22 m above the finished floor in corridors and exit access stairways and ramps.

k. Finish materials as provided for in other sections of this code.

1. Applies when protected by an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2

m. Corridors in ambulatory care facilities shall be provided with Class A or B materials.

===== Page 0821 =====
FIGURE 803.1.1(1)
ROOM CORNER TEST

FIGURE 803.1.2(1)
ASTM E84 TUNNEL TEST

FIGURE 803.1.2(2)
FLAME IN TUNNEL TEST

===== Page 0822 =====
FIGURE 803.1.1(2)
FLAME IN ROOM CORNER TEST

===== Page 0823 =====
FIGURE 803.15.4
THIN INTERIOR FINISH

FIGURE 804.2
RADIANT FLOOR PANEL TEST (NFPA 253)

===== Page 0824 =====
Wall area: 2 walls  \( (6 \times 3.6) + 2 \)  walls  \( (3 \times 3.6) = 64.8 \, \text{m}^2 \) , 10% of wall =  \( 64.8 \times 0.10 = 6.5 \, \text{m}^2 \)

Decorative trim coverage =  \( 6.5 \, \text{m}^2 \)

Ceiling  \( 6 \times 3 = 18 \, \text{m}^2 \) , 10% of ceiling =  \( 18 \times 0.10 = 1.8 \, \text{m}^2 \)

Decorative trim coverage =  \( 1.8 \, \text{m}^2 \)

===== Page 0825 =====
This page left intentionally blank

